Cell Reproduction




FIGURE 10.1 A sea urchin begins life as a single diploid cell (zygote) that (a) divides through cell division to form two
genetically identical daughter cells, visible here through scanning electron microscopy (SEM). After four rounds of
cell division, (b) there are 16 cells, as seen in this SEM image. After many rounds of cell division, the individual
develops into a complex, multicellular organism, as seen in this (c) mature sea urchin. (credit a: modification of work
by Evelyn Spiegel, Louisa Howard; credit b: modification of work by Evelyn Spiegel, Louisa Howard; credit c:
modification of work by Marco Busdraghi; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)


CHAPTER OUTLINE
10.1 Cell Division
10.2 The Cell Cycle
10.3 Control of the Cell Cycle
10.4 Cancer and the Cell Cycle
10.5 Prokaryotic Cell Division


INTRODUCTION A human, like every sexually reproducing organism, begins life as a fertilized egg
(embryo) or zygote. In our species, billions of cell divisions subsequently must occur in a
controlled manner in order to produce a complex, multicellular human comprising trillions of cells.
Thus, the original single-celled zygote is literally the ancestor of all cells in the body. However,
once a human is fully grown, cell reproduction is still necessary to repair and regenerate tissues,
and sometimes to increase our size! In fact, all multicellular organisms use cell division for growth
and the maintenance and repair of cells and tissues. Cell division is closely regulated, and the
occasional failure of this regulation can have life-threatening consequences. Single-celled
organisms may also use cell division as their method of reproduction.

10.1 Cell Division
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Describe the structure of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes
   • Distinguish between chromosomes, genes, and traits
   • Describe the mechanisms of chromosome compaction

The continuity of life from one cell to another has its foundation in the reproduction of cells by way
of the cell cycle. The cell cycle is an orderly sequence of events that describes the stages of a
cell’s life from the division of a single parent cell to the production of two new genetically identical
daughter cells.

Genomic DNA
Before discussing the steps a cell must undertake to replicate and divide its DNA, a deeper
268   10 • Cell Reproduction



      understanding of the structure and function of a cell’s genetic information is necessary. A cell’s
      DNA, packaged as a double-stranded DNA molecule, is called its genome. In prokaryotes, the
      genome is composed of a single, double-stranded DNA molecule in the form of a loop or circle
      (Figure 10.2). The region in the cell containing this genetic material is called a nucleoid. Some
      prokaryotes also have smaller loops of DNA called plasmids that are not essential for normal
      growth. Bacteria can exchange these plasmids with other bacteria, sometimes receiving beneficial
      new genes that the recipient can add to their chromosomal DNA. Antibiotic resistance is one trait
      that often spreads through a bacterial colony through plasmid exchange from resistant donors to
      recipient cells.




      FIGURE 10.2 Prokaryotes, including both Bacteria and Archaea, have a single, circular chromosome located in a
      central region called the nucleoid.

      In eukaryotes, the genome consists of several double-stranded linear DNA molecules (Figure
      10.3). Each species of eukaryotes has a characteristic number of chromosomes in the nuclei of its
      cells. Human body (somatic) cells have 46 chromosomes, while human gametes (sperm or eggs)
      have 23 chromosomes each. A typical body cell contains two matched or homologous sets of
      chromosomes (one set from each biological parent)—a configuration known as diploid. (Note: The
      letter n is used to represent a single set of chromosomes; therefore, a diploid organism is
      designated 2n.) Human cells that contain one set of chromosomes are called gametes, or sex
      cells; these are eggs and sperm, and are designated 1n, or haploid.

      Upon fertilization, each gamete contributes one set of chromosomes, creating a diploid cell
      containing matched pairs of chromosomes called homologous (“same knowledge”)
      chromosomes. Homologous chromosomes are the same length and have specific nucleotide
      segments called genes in exactly the same location, or locus. Genes, the functional units of
      chromosomes, determine specific characteristics by coding for specific proteins. Traits are the
      variations of those characteristics. For example, hair color is a characteristic with traits that are
      blonde, brown, or black, and many colors in between.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                           10.1 • Cell Division   269




FIGURE 10.3 There are 23 pairs of homologous chromosomes in a female human somatic cell. The condensed chromosomes are viewed
within the nucleus (top), removed from a cell during mitosis (also called karyokinesis or nuclear division) and spread out on a slide (right),
and artificially arranged according to length (left); an arrangement like this is called a karyotype. In this image, the chromosomes were
exposed to fluorescent stains for differentiation of the different chromosomes. A method of staining called “chromosome painting”
employs fluorescent dyes that highlight chromosomes in different colors. (credit: National Human Genome Project/NIH)

Each copy of a homologous pair of chromosomes originates from a different parent; therefore, the different genes
(alleles) themselves are not identical, although they code for the same traits such as “hair color.” The variation of
individuals within a species is due to the specific combination of the genes inherited from both parents. Even a
slightly altered sequence of nucleotides within a gene can result in an alternative trait. For example, there are three
possible gene sequences on the human chromosome that code for blood type: sequence A, sequence B, and
sequence O. Because all diploid human cells have two copies of the chromosome that determines blood type, the
blood type (the trait) is determined by the two alleles of the marker gene that are inherited. It is possible to have
two copies of the same gene sequence on both homologous chromosomes, with one on each (for example, AA, BB,
or OO), or two different sequences, such as AB, AO, or BO.

Apparently minor variations of traits, such as blood type, eye color, and handedness, contribute to the natural
variation found within a species, but even though they seem minor, these traits may be connected with the
expression of other traits as of yet unknown. However, if the entire DNA sequence from any pair of human
homologous chromosomes is compared, the difference is much less than one percent. The sex chromosomes, X and
Y, are the single exception to the rule of homologous chromosome uniformity: Other than a small amount of
homology that is necessary to accurately produce gametes, the genes found on the X and Y chromosomes are
different.

Eukaryotic Chromosomal Structure and Compaction
If the DNA from all 46 chromosomes in a human cell nucleus were laid out end-to-end, it would measure
approximately two meters; however, its diameter would be only 2 nm! Considering that the size of a typical human
cell is about 10 µm (100,000 cells lined up to equal one meter), DNA must be tightly packaged to fit in the cell’s
nucleus. At the same time, it must also be readily accessible for the genes to be expressed. For this reason, the long
strands of DNA are condensed into compact chromosomes during certain stages of the cell cycle. There are a
number of ways that chromosomes are compacted.

In the first level of compaction, short stretches of the DNA double helix wrap around a core of eight histone
proteins at regular intervals along the entire length of the chromosome (Figure 10.4). The DNA-histone complex is
called chromatin. The beadlike, histone DNA complex is called a nucleosome, and DNA connecting the
nucleosomes is called linker DNA. A DNA molecule in this form is about seven times shorter than the double helix
without the histones, and the beads are about 10 nm in diameter, in contrast with the 2-nm diameter of a DNA
double helix.

The second level of compaction occurs as the nucleosomes and the linker DNA between them coil into a 30-nm
chromatin fiber. This coiling further condenses the chromosome so that it is now about 50 times shorter than the
270   10 • Cell Reproduction



      extended form.

      In the third level of compaction, a variety of fibrous proteins is used to “pack the chromatin.” These fibrous proteins
      also ensure that each chromosome in a non-dividing cell occupies a particular area of the nucleus that does not
      overlap with that of any other chromosome (see the top image in Figure 10.3).




      FIGURE 10.4 Each linear chromosome in a eukaryotic cell is packaged into chromatin, a combination of DNA and proteins. The double-
      stranded DNA helix associates with the core histones to form nucleosomes. These nucleosomes are further organized into a 30 nm fiber by
      the linker histone, H1. The fiber then associates with additional proteins to form loops and higher-order heterochromatin packing. DNA
      packing reaches its most condensed state during metaphase in mitosis in preparation for chromosome separation. Chromatin packing is
      dynamic and undergoes reversible changes in response to changes in gene expression and the cell cycle. Credit: Rao, A., Ryan, K. Fletcher,
      S. Hawkins, A. and Tag, A. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

      DNA replicates in the S phase of interphase, which technically is not a part of mitosis, but must always precede it.
      After replication, the chromosomes are composed of two linked sister chromatids. When fully compact, the pairs of
      identically packed chromosomes are bound to each other by cohesin proteins. The connection between the sister
      chromatids is closest in a region called the centromere. The conjoined sister chromatids, with a diameter of about 1
      µm, are visible under a light microscope. The centromeric region is highly condensed and thus will appear as a
      constricted area.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      This animation illustrates the different levels of chromosome packing.

      Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/10-1-cell-division)




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                        10.2 • The Cell Cycle   271




10.2 The Cell Cycle
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Describe the three stages of interphase
   • Discuss the behavior of chromosomes during karyokinesis/mitosis
   • Explain how the cytoplasmic content is divided during cytokinesis
   • Define the quiescent G0 phase

The cell cycle is an ordered series of events involving cell growth and cell division that produces two new daughter
cells. Cells on the path to cell division proceed through a series of precisely timed and carefully regulated stages of
growth, DNA replication, and nuclear and cytoplasmic division that ultimately produces two identical (clone) cells.
The cell cycle has two major phases: interphase and the mitotic phase (Figure 10.5). During interphase, the cell
grows and DNA is replicated. During the mitotic phase, the replicated DNA and cytoplasmic contents are separated,
and the cell cytoplasm is typically partitioned by a third process of the cell cycle called cytokinesis. We should note,
however, that interphase and mitosis (karyokinesis) may take place without cytokinesis, in which case cells with
multiple nuclei (multinucleate cells) are produced.




FIGURE 10.5 The cell cycle in multicellular organisms consists of interphase and the mitotic phase. During interphase, the cell grows and
the nuclear DNA is duplicated. Interphase is followed by the mitotic phase. During the mitotic phase, the duplicated chromosomes are
segregated and distributed into daughter nuclei. Following mitosis, the cytoplasm is usually divided as well by cytokinesis, resulting in two
genetically identical daughter cells.

Interphase
During interphase, the cell undergoes normal growth processes while also preparing for cell division. In order for a
cell to move from interphase into the mitotic phase, many internal and external conditions must be met. The three
stages of interphase are called G1, S, and G2.

G1 Phase (First Gap)
The first stage of interphase is called the G1 phase (first gap) because, from a microscopic point of view, little
change is visible. However, during the G1 stage, the cell is quite active at the biochemical level. The cell is
accumulating the building blocks of chromosomal DNA and the associated proteins as well as accumulating
sufficient energy reserves to complete the task of replicating each chromosome in the nucleus.
272   10 • Cell Reproduction



      S Phase (Synthesis of DNA)
      Throughout interphase, nuclear DNA remains in a semi-condensed chromatin configuration. In the S phase, DNA
      replication can proceed through the mechanisms that result in the formation of identical pairs of DNA
      molecules—sister chromatids—that are firmly attached at the centromeric region. The centrosome is also duplicated
      during the S phase. The two centrosomes will give rise to the mitotic spindle, the apparatus that orchestrates the
      movement of chromosomes during mitosis. For example, roughly at the center of each animal cell, the centrosomes
      are associated with a pair of rod-like objects, the centrioles, which are positioned at right angles to each other.
      Centrioles help organize cell division. We should note, however, that centrioles are not present in the centrosomes
      of other eukaryotic organisms, such as plants and most fungi.

      G2 Phase (Second Gap)
      In the G2 phase, the cell replenishes its energy stores and synthesizes proteins necessary for chromosome
      manipulation and movement. Some cell organelles are duplicated, and the cytoskeleton is dismantled to provide
      resources for the mitotic phase. There may be additional cell growth during G2. The final preparations for the mitotic
      phase must be completed before the cell is able to enter the first stage of mitosis.

      The Mitotic Phase
      The mitotic phase is a multistep process during which the duplicated chromosomes are aligned, separated, and
      move into two new, identical daughter cells. The first portion of the mitotic phase is called karyokinesis, or nuclear
      division. As we have just seen, the second portion of the mitotic phase (and often viewed as a process separate from
      and following mitosis) is called cytokinesis—the physical separation of the cytoplasmic components into the two
      daughter cells.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      Revisit the stages of mitosis at this site (https://openstax.org/l/Cell_cycle_mito).


      Karyokinesis (Mitosis)
      Karyokinesis, also known as mitosis, is divided into a series of phases—prophase, prometaphase, metaphase,
      anaphase, and telophase—that result in the division of the cell nucleus (Figure 10.6).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      10.2 • The Cell Cycle   273




        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 10.6 G2 of Interphase – The last stage of interphase is the second gap period, G2. During this stage, cells grow, replenish energy
and synthesize needed macromolecules, such as proteins and lipids.
Mitosis - When G2 is complete, the cell will enter mitosis. Although there are 5 phases in mitosis, with the exception of the metaphase to
anaphase transition, these phases are not discrete and happen as a continuous process. Prophase is the first stage in mitosis. The nuclear
envelope begins to break down and chromosomes condense and are now visible. Spindle fibers start to appear and centrosomes begin to
move towards opposite poles.
Prometaphase - Chromosomes continue to condense and are more visible. Kinetochores appear at the centromere and kinetochore
microtubules attach. Centrosomes continue to move towards opposite poles.
Metaphase – The mitotic spindle is fully developed and centrosomes are at opposite poles. Chromosomes are aligned at the “equatorial
274   10 • Cell Reproduction



      plate”, and each sister chromatid rests on one side of the plate, with spindle fibers attached to them.
      Anaphase - Sister chromatids are pulled apart by spindle fibers and are separated from each other. Each chromatid is now a chromosome.
      Telophase and Cytokinesis - Chromosomes arrive at opposite poles and start to decondense and become less visible. The nuclear
      envelope reassembles and begins to surround each new set of chromosomes. The mitotic spindle assembly breaks down and the division
      of the cytoplasm begins via cytokinesis. This physical separation into two cells are remarkably different processes in plant and animal cells.
      Credit: Rao, A., Hawkins, A.and Fletcher, S. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

      Which of the following is the correct order of events in mitosis?

        a. Sister chromatids line up at the metaphase plate. The kinetochore becomes attached to the mitotic spindle.
           The nucleus reforms and the cell divides. Cohesin proteins break down and the sister chromatids separate.
        b. The kinetochore becomes attached to the mitotic spindle. Cohesin proteins break down and the sister
           chromatids separate. Sister chromatids line up at the metaphase plate. The nucleus reforms and the cell
           divides.
        c. The kinetochore becomes attached to the cohesin proteins. Sister chromatids line up at the metaphase plate.
           The kinetochore breaks down and the sister chromatids separate. The nucleus reforms and the cell divides.
        d. The kinetochore becomes attached to the mitotic spindle. Sister chromatids line up at the metaphase plate.
           Cohesin proteins break down and the sister chromatids separate. The nucleus reforms and the cell divides.


      Prophase (the “first phase”): the nuclear envelope starts to dissociate into small vesicles, and the membranous
      organelles (such as the Golgi complex [Golgi apparatus] and the endoplasmic reticulum), fragment and disperse
      toward the periphery of the cell. The nucleolus disappears (disperses) as well, and the centrosomes begin to move
      to opposite poles of the cell. Microtubules that will form the mitotic spindle extend between the centrosomes,
      pushing them farther apart as the microtubule fibers lengthen. The sister chromatids begin to coil more tightly with
      the aid of condensin proteins and now become visible under a light microscope.

      Prometaphase (the “first change phase”): Many processes that began in prophase continue to advance. The
      remnants of the nuclear envelope fragment further, and the mitotic spindle continues to develop as more
      microtubules assemble and stretch across the length of the former nuclear area. Chromosomes become even more
      condensed and discrete. Each sister chromatid develops a protein structure called a kinetochore in its centromeric
      region (Figure 10.7). The proteins of the kinetochore attract and bind to the mitotic spindle microtubules. As the
      spindle microtubules extend from the centrosomes, some of these microtubules come into contact with and firmly
      bind to the kinetochores. Once a mitotic fiber attaches to a chromosome, the chromosome will be oriented until the
      kinetochores of sister chromatids face the opposite poles. Eventually, all the sister chromatids will be attached via
      their kinetochores to microtubules from opposing poles. Spindle microtubules that do not engage the chromosomes
      are called polar microtubules. These microtubules overlap each other midway between the two poles and
      contribute to cell elongation. Astral microtubules are located near the poles, aid in spindle orientation, and are
      required for the regulation of mitosis.




      FIGURE 10.7 During prometaphase, mitotic spindle microtubules from opposite poles attach to each sister chromatid at the kinetochore. In
      anaphase, the connection between the sister chromatids breaks down, and the microtubules pull the chromosomes toward opposite poles.

      Metaphase (the “change phase”): All the chromosomes are aligned in a plane called the metaphase plate, or the
      equatorial plane, roughly midway between the two poles of the cell. The sister chromatids are still tightly attached



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                       10.2 • The Cell Cycle    275



to each other by cohesin proteins. At this time, the chromosomes are maximally condensed.

Anaphase (“upward phase”): The cohesin proteins degrade, and the sister chromatids separate at the centromere.
Each chromatid, now called a single chromosome, is pulled rapidly toward the centrosome to which its microtubule
is attached. The cell becomes visibly elongated (oval shaped) as the polar microtubules slide against each other at
the metaphase plate where they overlap.

Telophase (the “distance phase”): the chromosomes reach the opposite poles and begin to decondense (unravel),
relaxing once again into a stretched-out chromatin configuration. The mitotic spindles are depolymerized into
tubulin monomers that will be used to assemble cytoskeletal components for each daughter cell. Nuclear envelopes
form around the chromosomes, and nucleosomes appear within the nuclear area.

Cytokinesis




FIGURE 10.8 Mitotic Cell at Metaphase. The microtubule spindle has completed the alignment of chromosomes at the metaphase plate in
preparation for the separation of sister chromatids during anaphase. Credit: Fletcher, S., Ryan, K. and Rao, A., Department of Biology, Texas
A&M University.

Cytokinesis, or “cell motion,” is sometimes viewed as the second main stage of the mitotic phase, during which cell
division is completed via the physical separation of the cytoplasmic components into two daughter cells However, as
we have seen earlier, cytokinesis can also be viewed as a separate phase, which may or may not take place following
mitosis. If cytokinesis does take place, cell division is not complete until the cell components have been
apportioned and completely separated into the two daughter cells. Although the stages of mitosis are similar for
most eukaryotes, the process of cytokinesis is quite different for eukaryotes that have cell walls, such as plant cells.

In animal cells, cytokinesis typically starts during late anaphase. A contractile ring composed of actin filaments
forms just inside the plasma membrane at the former metaphase plate. The actin filaments pull the equator of the
cell inward, forming a fissure. This fissure is called the cleavage furrow. The furrow deepens as the actin ring
contracts, and eventually the membrane is cleaved in two (Figure 10.9).

In plant cells, a new cell wall must form between the daughter cells. During interphase, the Golgi apparatus
accumulates enzymes, structural proteins, and glucose molecules prior to breaking into vesicles and dispersing
throughout the dividing cell. During telophase, these Golgi vesicles are transported on microtubules to form a
phragmoplast (a vesicular structure) at the metaphase plate. There, the vesicles fuse and coalesce from the center
toward the cell walls; this structure is called a cell plate. As more vesicles fuse, the cell plate enlarges until it
merges with the cell walls at the periphery of the cell. Enzymes use the glucose that has accumulated between the
membrane layers to build a new cell wall. The Golgi membranes become parts of the plasma membrane on either
side of the new cell wall (Figure 10.9).
276   10 • Cell Reproduction




      FIGURE 10.9 Animal cell cleavage - Contraction of actin filaments by myosin pull the “equator” of the cell causing an invagination of the
      cell (a fissure called a cleavage furrow). The cleavage furrow gets continuously deeper until it eventually divides the cell into two new,
      independent daughter cells.
      Plant cell wall formation - A mixture of enzymes, proteins, and glucose molecules are transported via vesicles to the center of the cell.
      These vesicles continuously build upon each other until a completely new cell wall has emerged and two new cells are formed,
      independent of one another.
      Credit: Rao, A., Ryan, K., Hawkins, A.and Fletcher, S. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

      G0 Phase
      Not all cells adhere to the classic cell-cycle pattern in which a newly formed daughter cell immediately enters the
      preparatory phases of interphase, closely followed by the mitotic phase, and cytokinesis. Cells in G0 phase are not
      actively preparing to divide. The cell is in a quiescent (inactive) stage that occurs when cells exit the cell cycle.
      Some cells enter G0 temporarily due to environmental conditions such as availability of nutrients, or stimulation by
      growth factors. The cell will remain in this phase until conditions improve or until an external signal triggers the
      onset of G1. Other cells that never or rarely divide, such as mature cardiac muscle and nerve cells, remain in G0
      permanently.



              SCIENTIFIC METHOD CONNECTION

      Determine the Time Spent in Cell-Cycle Stages
      Problem: How long does a cell spend in interphase compared to each stage of mitosis?

      Background: A prepared microscope slide of whitefish blastula cross-sections will show cells arrested in various
      stages of the cell cycle. (Note: It is not visually possible to separate the stages of interphase from each other, but
      the mitotic stages are readily identifiable.) If 100 cells are examined, the number of cells in each identifiable cell-
      cycle stage will give an estimate of the time it takes for the cell to complete that stage.

      Problem Statement: Given the events included in all of interphase and those that take place in each stage of
      mitosis, estimate the length of each stage based on a 24-hour cell cycle. Before proceeding, state your hypothesis.

      Test your hypothesis: Test your hypothesis by doing the following:

        1. Place a fixed and stained microscope slide of whitefish blastula cross-sections under the scanning objective of
           a light microscope.
        2. Locate and focus on one of the sections using the low-power objective of your microscope. Notice that the
           section is a circle composed of dozens of closely packed individual cells.
        3. Switch to the medium-power objective and refocus. With this objective, individual cells are clearly visible, but
           the chromosomes will still be very small.
        4. Switch to the high-power objective and slowly move the slide left to right, and up and down to view all the
           cells in the section (Figure 10.10). As you scan, you will notice that most of the cells are not undergoing




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                       10.2 • The Cell Cycle   277



      mitosis but are in the interphase period of the cell cycle.




      FIGURE 10.10 Slowly scan whitefish blastula cells with the high-power objective as illustrated in image (a) to identify their mitotic
      stage. (b) A microscopic image of the scanned cells is shown. (credit “micrograph”: modification of work by Linda Flora; scale-bar
      data from Matt Russell)

  5. Practice identifying the various stages of the cell cycle, using the drawings of the stages as a guide (Figure
     10.6).
  6. Once you are confident about your identification, begin to record the stage of each cell you encounter as you
     scan left to right, and top to bottom across the blastula section.
  7. Keep a tally of your observations and stop when you reach 100 cells identified.
  8. The larger the sample size (total number of cells counted), the more accurate the results. If possible, gather
     and record group data prior to calculating percentages and making estimates.

Record your observations: Make a table similar to Table 10.1 within which to record your observations.

                                                Results of Cell Stage Identification

                           Phase or Stage          Individual Totals        Group Totals            Percent

                              Interphase

                               Prophase

                              Metaphase

                               Anaphase

                               Telophase

                              Cytokinesis

                                 Totals                    100                    100            100 percent

                         TABLE 10.1

Analyze your data/report your results: To find the length of time whitefish blastula cells spend in each stage,
multiply the percent (recorded as a decimal) by 24 hours. Make a table similar to Table 10.2 to illustrate your data.
278   10 • Cell Reproduction




                                                   Estimate of Cell Stage Length

                                           Phase or Stage      Percent     Time in Hours

                                              Interphase

                                              Prophase

                                              Metaphase

                                              Anaphase

                                              Telophase

                                             Cytokinesis

                                         TABLE 10.2

      Draw a conclusion: Did your results support your estimated times? Were any of the outcomes unexpected? If so,
      discuss those events in that stage that may have contributed to the calculated time.


      10.3 Control of the Cell Cycle
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Understand how the cell cycle is controlled by mechanisms that are both internal and external to the cell
         • Explain how the three internal “control checkpoints” occur at the end of G1, at the G2/M transition, and
            during metaphase
         • Describe the molecules that control the cell cycle through positive and negative regulation

      The length of the cell cycle is highly variable, even within the cells of a single organism. In humans, the frequency of
      cell turnover ranges from a few hours in early embryonic development, to an average of two to five days for
      epithelial cells, and to an entire human lifetime spent in G0 by specialized cells, such as cortical neurons or cardiac
      muscle cells.

      There is also variation in the time that a cell spends in each phase of the cell cycle. When rapidly dividing
      mammalian cells are grown in a culture (outside the body under optimal growing conditions), the length of the cell
      cycle is about 24 hours. In rapidly dividing human cells with a 24-hour cell cycle, the G1 phase lasts approximately
      nine hours, the S phase lasts 10 hours, the G2 phase lasts about four and one-half hours, and the M phase lasts
      approximately one-half hour. By comparison, in fertilized eggs (and early embryos) of fruit flies, the cell cycle is
      completed in about eight minutes. This is because the nucleus of the fertilized egg divides many times by mitosis
      but does not go through cytokinesis until a multinucleate “zygote” has been produced, with many nuclei located
      along the periphery of the cell membrane, thereby shortening the time of the cell division cycle. The timing of events
      in the cell cycle of both “invertebrates” and “vertebrates” is controlled by mechanisms that are both internal and
      external to the cell.

      Regulation of the Cell Cycle by External Events
      Both the initiation and inhibition of cell division are triggered by events external to the cell when it is about to begin
      the replication process. An event may be as simple as the death of nearby cells or as sweeping as the release of
      growth-promoting hormones, such as human growth hormone (HGH or hGH). A lack of HGH can inhibit cell
      division, resulting in dwarfism, whereas too much HGH can result in gigantism. Crowding of cells can also inhibit cell
      division. In contrast, a factor that can initiate cell division is the size of the cell: As a cell grows, it becomes
      physiologically inefficient due to its decreasing surface-to-volume ratio. The solution to this problem is to divide.

      Whatever the source of the message, the cell receives the signal, and a series of events within the cell allows it to



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           10.3 • Control of the Cell Cycle   279



proceed into interphase. Moving forward from this initiation point, every parameter required during each cell cycle
phase must be met or the cycle cannot progress.

Regulation at Internal Checkpoints
It is essential that the daughter cells produced be exact duplicates of the parent cell. Mistakes in the duplication or
distribution of the chromosomes lead to mutations that may be passed forward to every new cell produced from an
abnormal cell. To prevent a compromised cell from continuing to divide, there are internal control mechanisms that
operate at three main cell-cycle checkpoints: A checkpoint is one of several points in the eukaryotic cell cycle at
which the progression of a cell to the next stage in the cycle can be halted until conditions are favorable. These
checkpoints occur near the end of G1, at the G2/M transition, and during metaphase (Figure 10.11).




FIGURE 10.11 The cell cycle is controlled at three checkpoints. The integrity of the DNA is assessed at the G1 checkpoint. Proper
chromosome duplication is assessed at the G2 checkpoint. Attachment of each kinetochore to a spindle fiber is assessed at the M
checkpoint.

The G1 Checkpoint
The G1 checkpoint determines whether all conditions are favorable for cell division to proceed. The G1 checkpoint,
also called the restriction point (in yeast), is a point at which the cell irreversibly commits to the cell division
process. External influences, such as growth factors, play a large role in carrying the cell past the G1 checkpoint. In
addition to adequate reserves and cell size, there is a check for genomic DNA damage at the G1 checkpoint. A cell
that does not meet all the requirements will not be allowed to progress into the S phase. The cell can halt the cycle
and attempt to remedy the problematic condition, or the cell can advance into G0 and await further signals when
conditions improve.

The G2 Checkpoint
The G2 checkpoint bars entry into the mitotic phase if certain conditions are not met. As at the G1 checkpoint, cell
size and protein reserves are assessed. However, the most important role of the G2 checkpoint is to ensure that all
of the chromosomes have been replicated and that the replicated DNA is not damaged. If the checkpoint
mechanisms detect problems with the DNA, the cell cycle is halted, and the cell attempts to either complete DNA
replication or repair the damaged DNA.
280   10 • Cell Reproduction



      The M Checkpoint
      The M checkpoint occurs near the end of the metaphase stage of karyokinesis. The M checkpoint is also known as
      the spindle checkpoint, because it determines whether all the sister chromatids are correctly attached to the
      spindle microtubules. Because the separation of the sister chromatids during anaphase is an irreversible step, the
      cycle will not proceed until the kinetochores of each pair of sister chromatids are firmly anchored to at least two
      spindle fibers arising from opposite poles of the cell.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      Watch what occurs at the G1, G2, and M checkpoints by visiting this website (https://openstax.org/l/cell_checkpnts)
      to see an animation of the cell cycle.


      Regulator Molecules of the Cell Cycle
      In addition to the internally controlled checkpoints, there are two groups of intracellular molecules that regulate the
      cell cycle. These regulatory molecules either promote progress of the cell to the next phase (positive regulation) or
      halt the cycle (negative regulation). Regulator molecules may act individually, or they can influence the activity or
      production of other regulatory proteins. Therefore, the failure of a single regulator may have almost no effect on the
      cell cycle, especially if more than one mechanism controls the same event. However, the effect of a deficient or non-
      functioning regulator can be wide-ranging and possibly fatal to the cell if multiple processes are affected.

      Positive Regulation of the Cell Cycle
      Two groups of proteins, called cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), are termed positive regulators. They
      are responsible for the progress of the cell through the various checkpoints. The levels of the four cyclin proteins
      fluctuate throughout the cell cycle in a predictable pattern (Figure 10.12). Increases in the concentration of cyclin
      proteins are triggered by both external and internal signals. After the cell moves to the next stage of the cell cycle,
      the cyclins that were active in the previous stage are degraded by cytoplasmic enzymes, as shown in Figure 10.12
      below.




      FIGURE 10.12 The concentrations of cyclin proteins change throughout the cell cycle. There is a direct correlation between cyclin
      accumulation and the three major cell-cycle checkpoints. Also note the sharp decline of cyclin levels following each checkpoint (the
      transition between phases of the cell cycle), as cyclin is degraded by cytoplasmic enzymes. (credit: modification of work by
      "WikiMiMa"/Wikimedia Commons)

      Cyclins regulate the cell cycle only when they are tightly bound to Cdks. To be fully active, the Cdk/cyclin complex
      must also be phosphorylated in specific locations to activate the complex. Like all kinases, Cdks are enzymes
      (kinases) that in turn phosphorylate other proteins. Phosphorylation activates the protein by changing its shape. The
      proteins phosphorylated by Cdks are involved in advancing the cell to the next phase. (Figure 10.13). The levels of
      Cdk proteins are relatively stable throughout the cell cycle; however, the concentrations of cyclin fluctuate and
      determine when Cdk/cyclin complexes form. The different cyclins and Cdks bind at specific points in the cell cycle
      and thus regulate different checkpoints.



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         10.3 • Control of the Cell Cycle   281




FIGURE 10.13 Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) are protein kinases that, when fully activated, can phosphorylate and thus activate other
proteins that advance the cell cycle past a checkpoint. To become fully activated, a Cdk must bind to a cyclin protein and then be
phosphorylated by another kinase.

Because the cyclic fluctuations of cyclin levels are largely based on the timing of the cell cycle and not on specific
events, regulation of the cell cycle usually occurs by either the Cdk molecules alone or the Cdk/cyclin complexes.
Without a specific concentration of fully activated cyclin/Cdk complexes, the cell cycle cannot proceed through the
checkpoints.

Although the cyclins are the main regulatory molecules that determine the forward momentum of the cell cycle,
there are several other mechanisms that fine-tune the progress of the cycle with negative, rather than positive,
effects. These mechanisms essentially block the progression of the cell cycle until problematic conditions are
resolved. Molecules that prevent the full activation of Cdks are called Cdk inhibitors. Many of these inhibitor
molecules directly or indirectly monitor a particular cell-cycle event. The block placed on Cdks by inhibitor
molecules will not be removed until the specific event that the inhibitor monitors is completed.
282   10 • Cell Reproduction



      Negative Regulation of the Cell Cycle
      The second group of cell-cycle regulatory molecules are negative regulators, which stop the cell cycle. Remember
      that in positive regulation, active molecules cause the cycle to progress.

      The best understood negative regulatory molecules are retinoblastoma protein (Rb), p53, and p21.
      Retinoblastoma proteins are a group of tumor-suppressor proteins common in many cells. We should note here that
      the 53 and 21 designations refer to the functional molecular masses of the proteins (p) in kilodaltons (a dalton is
      equal to an atomic mass unit, which is equal to one proton or one neutron or 1 g/mol). Much of what is known about
      cell-cycle regulation comes from research conducted with cells that have lost regulatory control. All three of these
      regulatory proteins were discovered to be damaged or non-functional in cells that had begun to replicate
      uncontrollably (i.e., became cancerous). In each case, the main cause of the unchecked progress through the cell
      cycle was a faulty copy of the regulatory protein.

      Rb, p53, and p21 act primarily at the G1 checkpoint. p53 is a multi-functional protein that has a major impact on the
      commitment of a cell to division because it acts when there is damaged DNA in cells that are undergoing the
      preparatory processes during G1. If damaged DNA is detected, p53 halts the cell cycle and then recruits specific
      enzymes to repair the DNA. If the DNA cannot be repaired, p53 can trigger apoptosis, or cell suicide, to prevent the
      duplication of damaged chromosomes. As p53 levels rise, the production of p21 is triggered. p21 enforces the halt
      in the cycle dictated by p53 by binding to and inhibiting the activity of the Cdk/cyclin complexes. As a cell is exposed
      to more stress, higher levels of p53 and p21 accumulate, making it less likely that the cell will move into the S
      phase.

      Rb, which largely monitors cell size, exerts its regulatory influence on other positive regulator proteins. In the active,
      dephosphorylated state, Rb binds to proteins called transcription factors, most commonly, E2F (Figure 10.14).
      Transcription factors “turn on” specific genes, allowing the production of proteins encoded by that gene. When Rb is
      bound to E2F, production of proteins necessary for the G1/S transition is blocked. As the cell increases in size, Rb is
      slowly phosphorylated until it becomes inactivated. Rb releases E2F, which can now turn on the gene that produces
      the transition protein, and this particular block is removed. For the cell to move past each of the checkpoints, all
      positive regulators must be “turned on,” and all negative regulators must be “turned off.”



              VISUAL CONNECTION




                               FIGURE 10.14 Rb halts the cell cycle and releases its hold in response to cell growth.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        10.4 • Cancer and the Cell Cycle   283



Rb and other proteins that negatively regulate the cell cycle are sometimes called tumor suppressors. Why do you
think the name tumor suppressor might be appropriate for these proteins?


10.4 Cancer and the Cell Cycle
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Describe how cancer is caused by uncontrolled cell growth
   • Understand how proto-oncogenes are normal cell genes that, when mutated, become oncogenes
   • Describe how tumor suppressors function
   • Explain how mutant tumor suppressors cause cancer

Cancer comprises many different diseases caused by a common mechanism: uncontrolled cell growth. Despite the
redundancy and overlapping levels of cell-cycle control, errors do occur. One of the critical processes monitored by
the cell-cycle checkpoint surveillance mechanism is the proper replication of DNA during the S phase. Even when all
of the cell-cycle controls are fully functional, a small percentage of replication errors (mutations) will be passed on
to the daughter cells. If changes to the DNA nucleotide sequence occur within a coding portion of a gene and are not
corrected, a gene mutation results. All cancers start when a gene mutation gives rise to a faulty protein that plays a
key role in cell reproduction.

The change in the cell that results from the malformed protein may be minor: perhaps a slight delay in the binding of
Cdk to cyclin or an Rb protein that detaches from its target DNA while still phosphorylated. Even minor mistakes,
however, may allow subsequent mistakes to occur more readily. Over and over, small uncorrected errors are passed
from the parent cell to the daughter cells and amplified as each generation produces more non-functional proteins
from uncorrected DNA damage. Eventually, the pace of the cell cycle speeds up as the effectiveness of the control
and repair mechanisms decreases. Uncontrolled growth of the mutated cells outpaces the growth of normal cells in
the area, and a tumor (“-oma”) can result.




FIGURE 10.15 Cell Division and Apoptosis. In an adult organism, normal cell division is balanced by apoptosis (programmed cell death) to
maintain a constant cell number in homeostasis. Either an increase in cell division or a decrease in apoptosis leads an increase in the
number of cells and tumor formation. Credit: Rao, A. and Ryan, K. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

Proto-oncogenes
The genes that code for the positive cell-cycle regulators are called proto-oncogenes. Proto-oncogenes are normal
284   10 • Cell Reproduction



      genes that, when mutated in certain ways, become oncogenes—genes that cause a cell to become cancerous.
      Consider what might happen to the cell cycle in a cell with a recently acquired oncogene. In most instances, the
      alteration of the DNA sequence will result in a less functional (or non-functional) protein. The result is detrimental to
      the cell and will likely prevent the cell from completing the cell cycle; however, the organism is not harmed because
      the mutation will not be carried forward. If a cell cannot reproduce, the mutation is not propagated and the damage
      is minimal. Occasionally, however, a gene mutation causes a change that increases the activity of a positive
      regulator. For example, a mutation that allows Cdk to be activated without being partnered with cyclin could push
      the cell cycle past a checkpoint before all of the required conditions are met. If the resulting daughter cells are too
      damaged to undergo further cell divisions, the mutation would not be propagated and no harm would come to the
      organism. However, if the atypical daughter cells are able to undergo further cell divisions, subsequent generations
      of cells may accumulate even more mutations, some possibly in additional genes that regulate the cell cycle.

      The Cdk gene in the above example is only one of many genes that are considered proto-oncogenes. In addition to
      the cell-cycle regulatory proteins, any protein that influences the cycle can be altered in such a way as to override
      cell-cycle checkpoints. An oncogene is any gene that, when altered, leads to an increase in the rate of cell-cycle
      progression.

      Tumor Suppressor Genes
      Like proto-oncogenes, many of the negative cell-cycle regulatory proteins were discovered in cells that had become
      cancerous. Tumor suppressor genes are segments of DNA that code for negative regulator proteins, the type of
      regulators that, when activated, can prevent the cell from undergoing uncontrolled division. The collective function
      of the best-understood tumor suppressor gene proteins, Rb, p53, and p21, is to put up a roadblock to cell-cycle
      progression until certain events are completed. A cell that carries a mutated form of a negative regulator might not
      be able to halt the cell cycle if there is a problem. Tumor suppressors are similar to brakes in a vehicle:
      Malfunctioning brakes can contribute to a car crash!

      Mutated p53 genes have been identified in more than 50 percent of all human tumor cells. This discovery is not
      surprising in light of the multiple roles that the p53 protein plays at the G1 checkpoint. A cell with a faulty p53 may
      fail to detect errors present in the genomic DNA (Figure 10.16). Even if a partially functional p53 does identify the
      mutations, it may no longer be able to signal the necessary DNA repair enzymes. Either way, damaged DNA will
      remain uncorrected. At this point, a functional p53 will deem the cell unsalvageable and trigger programmed cell
      death (apoptosis). The damaged version of p53 found in cancer cells, however, cannot trigger apoptosis.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        10.4 • Cancer and the Cell Cycle   285




        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 10.16 The role of normal p53 is to monitor DNA and the supply of oxygen (hypoxia is a condition of reduced oxygen supply). If
damage is detected, p53 triggers repair mechanisms. If repairs are unsuccessful, p53 signals apoptosis. A cell with an abnormal p53
protein cannot repair damaged DNA and thus cannot signal apoptosis. Cells with abnormal p53 can become cancerous. (credit:
modification of work by Thierry Soussi)

Human papillomavirus can cause cervical cancer. The virus encodes E6, a protein that binds p53. Based on this fact
and what you know about p53, what effect do you think E6 binding has on p53 activity?

  a.   E6 activates p53
  b.   E6 inactivates p53
  c.   E6 mutates p53
  d.   E6 binding marks p53 for degradation


The loss of p53 function has other repercussions for the cell cycle. Mutated p53 might lose its ability to trigger p21
production. Without adequate levels of p21, there is no effective block on Cdk activation. Essentially, without a fully
functional p53, the G1 checkpoint is severely compromised and the cell proceeds directly from G1 to S regardless of
internal and external conditions. At the completion of this shortened cell cycle, two daughter cells are produced that
have inherited the mutated p53 gene. Given the non-optimal conditions under which the parent cell reproduced, it is
likely that the daughter cells will have acquired other mutations in addition to the faulty tumor-suppressor gene.
Cells such as these daughter cells quickly accumulate both oncogenes and non-functional tumor-suppressor genes.
Again, the result is tumor growth.

       LINK TO LEARNING
Watch an animation of how cancer results from errors in the cell cycle.

Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/10-4-cancer-and-the-cell-cycle)
286   10 • Cell Reproduction




      10.5 Prokaryotic Cell Division
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe the process of binary fission in prokaryotes
         • Explain how FtsZ and tubulin proteins are examples of homology

      Prokaryotes, such as bacteria, produce daughter cells by binary fission. For unicellular organisms, cell division is the
      only method to produce new individuals. In both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, the outcome of cell reproduction
      is a pair of daughter cells that are genetically identical to the parent cell. In unicellular organisms, daughter cells are
      individuals.

      To achieve the outcome of cloned offspring, certain steps are essential. The genomic DNA must be replicated and
      then allocated into the daughter cells; the cytoplasmic contents must also be divided to give both new cells the
      cellular machinery to sustain life. As we’ve seen with bacterial cells, the genome consists of a single, circular DNA
      chromosome; therefore, the process of cell division is simplified. Karyokinesis is unnecessary because there is no
      true nucleus and thus no need to direct one copy of the multiple chromosomes into each daughter cell. This type of
      cell division is called binary (prokaryotic) fission.

      Binary Fission
      Due to the relative simplicity of the prokaryotes, the cell division process is a less complicated and much more rapid
      process than cell division in eukaryotes. As a review of the general information on cell division we discussed at the
      beginning of this chapter, recall that the single, circular DNA chromosome of bacteria occupies a specific location,
      the nucleoid region, within the cell (Figure 10.2). Although the DNA of the nucleoid is associated with proteins that
      aid in packaging the molecule into a compact size, there are no histone proteins and thus no nucleosomes in
      prokaryotes. The packing proteins of bacteria are, however, related to the cohesin and condensin proteins involved
      in the chromosome compaction of eukaryotes.

      The bacterial chromosome is attached to the plasma membrane at about the midpoint of the cell. The starting point
      of replication, the origin, is close to the binding site of the chromosome to the plasma membrane (Figure 10.17).
      Replication of the DNA is bidirectional, moving away from the origin on both strands of the loop simultaneously. As
      the new double strands are formed, each origin point moves away from the cell wall attachment toward the opposite
      ends of the cell. As the cell elongates, the growing membrane aids in the transport of the chromosomes. After the
      chromosomes have cleared the midpoint of the elongated cell, cytoplasmic separation begins. The formation of a
      ring composed of repeating units of a protein called FtsZ (short for “filamenting temperature-sensitive mutant Z”)
      directs the partition between the nucleoids. Formation of the FtsZ ring triggers the accumulation of other proteins
      that work together to recruit new membrane and cell wall materials to the site. A septum is formed between the
      daughter nucleoids, extending gradually from the periphery toward the center of the cell. When the new cell walls
      are in place, the daughter cells separate.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        10.5 • Prokaryotic Cell Division   287




FIGURE 10.17 These images show the steps of binary fission in prokaryotes. (credit: modification of work by “Mcstrother”/Wikimedia
Commons)



        EVOLUTION CONNECTION

Mitotic Spindle Apparatus
The precise timing and formation of the mitotic spindle is critical to the success of eukaryotic cell division.
Prokaryotic cells, on the other hand, do not undergo karyokinesis and therefore have no need for a mitotic spindle.
However, the FtsZ protein that plays such a vital role in prokaryotic cytokinesis is structurally and functionally very
similar to tubulin, the building block of the microtubules which make up the mitotic spindle fibers that are necessary
for eukaryotic nuclear division. FtsZ proteins can form filaments, rings, and other three-dimensional structures that
resemble the way tubulin forms microtubules, centrioles, and various cytoskeletal components. In addition, both
288   10 • Cell Reproduction



      FtsZ and tubulin employ the same energy source, GTP (guanosine triphosphate), to rapidly assemble and
      disassemble complex structures.

      FtsZ and tubulin are considered to be homologous structures derived from common evolutionary origins. In this
      example, FtsZ is the ancestor protein to tubulin (an evolutionarily derived protein). While both proteins are found in
      extant organisms, tubulin function has evolved and diversified tremendously since evolving from its FtsZ prokaryotic
      origin. A survey of mitotic assembly components found in present-day unicellular eukaryotes reveals crucial
      intermediary steps to the complex membrane-enclosed genomes of multicellular eukaryotes (Table 10.3).

                                        Cell Division Apparatus among Various Organisms

                                                                                                           Separation of
                          Structure of genetic
                                                              Division of nuclear material                   daughter
                                material
                                                                                                               cells

                        There is no nucleus. The                                                           FtsZ proteins
                        single, circular           Occurs through binary fission. As the chromosome        assemble into
       Prokaryotes      chromosome exists in a     is replicated, the two copies move to opposite ends     a ring that
                        region of cytoplasm        of the cell by an unknown mechanism.                    pinches the
                        called the nucleoid.                                                               cell in two.

                                                                                                           Microfilaments
                                                   Chromosomes attach to the nuclear envelope,             form a
       Some             Linear chromosomes         which remains intact. The mitotic spindle passes        cleavage
       protists         exist in the nucleus.      through the envelope and elongates the cell. No         furrow that
                                                   centrioles exist.                                       pinches the
                                                                                                           cell in two.

                                                                                                           Microfilaments
                                                   A mitotic spindle forms from the centrioles and
                        Linear chromosomes                                                                 form a
                                                   passes through the nuclear membrane, which
       Other            wrapped around                                                                     cleavage
                                                   remains intact. Chromosomes attach to the mitotic
       protists         histones exist in the                                                              furrow that
                                                   spindle, which separates the chromosomes and
                        nucleus.                                                                           pinches the
                                                   elongates the cell.
                                                                                                           cell in two.

                                                                                                           Microfilaments
                                                   A mitotic spindle forms from the centrosomes. The       form a
       Animal           Linear chromosomes         nuclear envelope dissolves. Chromosomes attach to       cleavage
       cells            exist in the nucleus.      the mitotic spindle, which separates the                furrow that
                                                   chromosomes and elongates the cell.                     pinches the
                                                                                                           cell in two.

      TABLE 10.3




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              10 • Key Terms   289




Key Terms
anaphase stage of mitosis during which sister                 for mitosis
   chromatids are separated from each other                gamete haploid reproductive cell or sex cell (sperm,
binary fission prokaryotic cell division process              pollen grain, or egg)
cell cycle ordered series of events involving cell         gene physical and functional unit of heredity, a
   growth and cell division that produces two new             sequence of DNA that codes for a protein.
   daughter cells                                          genome total genetic information of a cell or
cell plate structure formed during plant cell                 organism
   cytokinesis by Golgi vesicles, forming a temporary      haploid cell, nucleus, or organism containing one set
   structure (phragmoplast) and fusing at the                 of chromosomes (n)
   metaphase plate; ultimately leads to the formation      histone one of several similar, highly conserved, low
   of cell walls that separate the two daughter cells         molecular weight, basic proteins found in the
cell-cycle checkpoint mechanism that monitors the             chromatin of all eukaryotic cells; associates with
   preparedness of a eukaryotic cell to advance               DNA to form nucleosomes
   through the various cell-cycle stages                   homologous chromosomes chromosomes of the
centriole rod-like structure constructed of                   same morphology with genes in the same location;
   microtubules at the center of each animal cell             diploid organisms have pairs of homologous
   centrosome                                                 chromosomes (homologs), with each homolog
centromere region at which sister chromatids are              derived from a different parent
   bound together; a constricted area in condensed         interphase period of the cell cycle leading up to
   chromosomes                                                mitosis; includes G1, S, and G2 phases (the interim
chromatid single DNA molecule of two strands of               period between two consecutive cell divisions)
   duplicated DNA and associated proteins held             karyokinesis mitotic nuclear division
   together at the centromere                              kinetochore protein structure associated with the
cleavage furrow constriction formed by an actin ring          centromere of each sister chromatid that attracts
   during cytokinesis in animal cells that leads to           and binds spindle microtubules during
   cytoplasmic division                                       prometaphase
condensin proteins that help sister chromatids coil        locus position of a gene on a chromosome
   during prophase                                         metaphase stage of mitosis during which
cyclin one of a group of proteins that act in                 chromosomes are aligned at the metaphase plate
   conjunction with cyclin-dependent kinases to help       metaphase plate equatorial plane midway between
   regulate the cell cycle by phosphorylating key             the two poles of a cell where the chromosomes
   proteins; the concentrations of cyclins fluctuate          align during metaphase
   throughout the cell cycle                               mitosis (also, karyokinesis) period of the cell cycle
cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) one of a group of               during which the duplicated chromosomes are
   protein kinases that helps to regulate the cell cycle      separated into identical nuclei; includes prophase,
   when bound to cyclin; it functions to phosphorylate        prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, and
   other proteins that are either activated or                telophase
   inactivated by phosphorylation                          mitotic phase period of the cell cycle during which
cytokinesis division of the cytoplasm following               duplicated chromosomes are distributed into two
   mitosis that forms two daughter cells.                     nuclei and cytoplasmic contents are divided;
diploid cell, nucleus, or organism containing two sets        includes karyokinesis (mitosis) and cytokinesis
   of chromosomes (2n)                                     mitotic spindle apparatus composed of microtubules
FtsZ tubulin-like protein component of the                    that orchestrates the movement of chromosomes
   prokaryotic cytoskeleton that is important in              during mitosis
   prokaryotic cytokinesis (name origin: Filamenting       nucleosome subunit of chromatin composed of a
   temperature-sensitive mutant Z)                            short length of DNA wrapped around a core of
G0 phase distinct from the G1 phase of interphase; a          histone proteins
   cell in G0 is not preparing to divide                   oncogene mutated version of a normal gene involved
G1 phase (also, first gap) first phase of interphase          in the positive regulation of the cell cycle
   centered on cell growth during mitosis                  origin (also, ORI) region of the prokaryotic
G2 phase (also, second gap) third phase of interphase         chromosome where replication begins (origin of
   during which the cell undergoes final preparations         replication)
290   10 • Chapter Summary



p21 cell-cycle regulatory protein that inhibits the cell       cell division
   cycle; its levels are controlled by p53                  retinoblastoma protein (Rb) regulatory molecule
p53 cell-cycle regulatory protein that regulates cell          that exhibits negative effects on the cell cycle by
   growth and monitors DNA damage; it halts the                interacting with a transcription factor (E2F)
   progression of the cell cycle in cases of DNA            S phase second, or synthesis, stage of interphase
   damage and may induce apoptosis                             during which DNA replication occurs
prometaphase stage of mitosis during which the              septum structure formed in a bacterial cell as a
   nuclear membrane breaks down and mitotic spindle            precursor to the separation of the cell into two
   fibers attach to kinetochores                               daughter cells
prophase stage of mitosis during which                      telophase stage of mitosis during which
   chromosomes condense and the mitotic spindle                chromosomes arrive at opposite poles, decondense,
   begins to form                                              and are surrounded by a new nuclear envelope
proto-oncogene normal gene that when mutated                tumor suppressor gene segment of DNA that codes
   becomes an oncogene                                         for regulator proteins that prevent the cell from
quiescent refers to a cell that is performing normal           undergoing uncontrolled division
   cell functions and has not initiated preparations for

Chapter Summary
10.1 Cell Division                                          karyokinesis (mitosis), which consists of five stages:
                                                            prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, and
Prokaryotes have a single circular chromosome
                                                            telophase. The final stage of the cell division process,
composed of double-stranded DNA, whereas
                                                            and sometimes viewed as the final stage of the mitotic
eukaryotes have multiple, linear chromosomes
                                                            phase, is cytokinesis, during which the cytoplasmic
composed of chromatin wrapped around histones, all
                                                            components of the daughter cells are separated either
of which are surrounded by a nuclear membrane. The
                                                            by an actin ring (animal cells) or by cell plate formation
46 chromosomes of human somatic cells are
                                                            (plant cells).
composed of 22 pairs of autosomes (matched pairs)
and a pair of sex chromosomes, which may or may not         10.3 Control of the Cell Cycle
be matched. This is the 2n or diploid state. Human
                                                            Each step of the cell cycle is monitored by internal
gametes have 23 chromosomes, or one complete set
                                                            controls called checkpoints. There are three major
of chromosomes; a set of chromosomes is complete
                                                            checkpoints in the cell cycle: one near the end of G1, a
with either one of the sex chromosomes, X or Y. This is
                                                            second at the G2/M transition, and the third during
the n or haploid state. Genes are segments of DNA that
                                                            metaphase. Positive regulator molecules allow the cell
code for a specific functional molecule (a protein or
                                                            cycle to advance to the next stage of cell division.
RNA). An organism’s traits are determined by the genes
                                                            Negative regulator molecules monitor cellular
inherited from each parent. Duplicated chromosomes
                                                            conditions and can halt the cycle until specific
are composed of two sister chromatids. Chromosomes
                                                            requirements are met.
are compacted using a variety of mechanisms during
certain stages of the cell cycle. Several classes of        10.4 Cancer and the Cell Cycle
protein are involved in the organization and packing of
                                                            Cancer is the result of unchecked cell division caused
the chromosomal DNA into a highly condensed
                                                            by a breakdown of the mechanisms that regulate the
structure. The condensing complex compacts
                                                            cell cycle. The loss of control begins with a change in
chromosomes, and the resulting condensed structure
                                                            the DNA sequence of a gene that codes for one of the
is necessary for chromosomal segregation during
                                                            regulatory molecules. Faulty instructions lead to a
mitosis.
                                                            protein that does not function as it should. Any
10.2 The Cell Cycle                                         disruption of the monitoring system can allow other
                                                            mistakes to be passed on to the daughter cells. Each
The cell cycle is an orderly sequence of events. Cells on
                                                            successive cell division will give rise to daughter cells
the path to cell division proceed through a series of
                                                            with even more accumulated damage. Eventually, all
precisely timed and carefully regulated stages. In
                                                            checkpoints become nonfunctional, and rapidly
eukaryotes, the cell cycle consists of a long
                                                            reproducing cells crowd out normal cells, resulting in a
preparatory period, called interphase, during which
                                                            tumor or leukemia (blood cancer).
chromosomes are replicated. Interphase is divided into
G1, S, and G2 phases. The mitotic phase begins with


Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              10 • Visual Connection Questions   291



10.5 Prokaryotic Cell Division                           chromosome but no nucleus. Therefore, mitosis
                                                         (karyokinesis) is not necessary in bacterial cell division.
In both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell division, the
                                                         Bacterial cytokinesis is directed by a ring composed of
genomic DNA is replicated and then each copy is
                                                         a protein called FtsZ. Ingrowth of membrane and cell
allocated into a daughter cell. In addition, the
                                                         wall material from the periphery of the cells results in
cytoplasmic contents are divided evenly and
                                                         the formation of a septum that eventually constructs
distributed to the new cells. However, there are many
                                                         the separate cell walls of the daughter cells.
differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell
division. Bacteria have a single, circular DNA

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 10.14 Rb and other proteins that                   that binds p53. Based on this fact and what you
      negatively regulate the cell cycle are sometimes          know about p53, what effect do you think E6
      called tumor suppressors. Why do you think the            binding has on p53 activity?
      name tumor suppressor might be appropriate                  a. E6 activates p53
      for these proteins?                                         b. E6 inactivates p53
                                                                  c. E6 mutates p53
   2. Figure 10.16 Human papillomavirus can cause
                                                                  d. E6 binding marks p53 for degradation
      cervical cancer. The virus encodes E6, a protein

Review Questions
   3. A diploid cell has_______ the number of                     d. prometaphase
      chromosomes as a haploid cell.
        a. one-fourth                                       8. Which of the following events does not occur
        b. half                                                during some stages of interphase?
        c. twice                                                 a. DNA duplication
        d. four times                                            b. organelle duplication
                                                                 c. increase in cell size
   4. An organism’s traits are determined by the                 d. separation of sister chromatids
      specific combination of inherited _____.
        a. cells.                                           9. The mitotic spindles arise from which cell
        b. genes.                                              structure?
        c. proteins.                                             a. centromere
        d. chromatids.                                           b. centrosome
                                                                 c. kinetochore
   5. The first level of DNA organization in a                   d. cleavage furrow
      eukaryotic cell is maintained by which molecule?
        a. cohesin                                        10. Attachment of the mitotic spindle fibers to the
        b. condensin                                          kinetochores is a characteristic of which stage of
        c. chromatin                                          mitosis?
        d. histone                                              a. prophase
                                                                b. prometaphase
   6. Identical copies of chromatin held together by            c. metaphase
      cohesin at the centromere are called _____.               d. anaphase
        a. histones.
        b. nucleosomes.                                   11. Unpacking of chromosomes and the formation of
        c. chromatin.                                         a new nuclear envelope is a characteristic of
        d. sister chromatids.                                 which stage of mitosis?
                                                                a. prometaphase
   7. Chromosomes are duplicated during what stage              b. metaphase
      of the cell cycle?                                        c. anaphase
        a. G1 phase                                             d. telophase
        b. S phase
         c. prophase                                      12. Separation of the sister chromatids is a
292   10 • Review Questions



       characteristic of which stage of mitosis?                 d. G0 checkpoint
         a. prometaphase
         b. metaphase                                     17. What is the main prerequisite for clearance at
         c. anaphase                                          the G2 checkpoint?
         d. telophase                                           a. cell has reached a sufficient size
                                                                b. an adequate stockpile of nucleotides
  13. The chromosomes become visible under a light              c. accurate and complete DNA replication
      microscope during which stage of mitosis?                 d. proper attachment of mitotic spindle
        a. prophase                                                 fibers to kinetochores
        b. prometaphase
        c. metaphase                                      18. If the M checkpoint is not cleared, what stage of
        d. anaphase                                           mitosis will be blocked?
                                                                 a. prophase
  14. The fusing of Golgi vesicles at the metaphase              b. prometaphase
      plate of dividing plant cells forms what                   c. metaphase
      structure?                                                 d. anaphase
        a. cell plate
        b. actin ring                                     19. Which protein is a positive regulator that
        c. cleavage furrow                                    phosphorylates other proteins when activated?
        d. mitotic spindle                                      a. p53
                                                                b. retinoblastoma protein (Rb)
  15. Figure 10.6 Which of the following is the correct         c. cyclin
      order of events in mitosis?                               d. cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk)
        a. Sister chromatids line up at the
            metaphase plate. The kinetochore              20. Many of the negative regulator proteins of the
            becomes attached to the mitotic spindle.          cell cycle were discovered in what type of cells?
            The nucleus reforms and the cell divides.           a. gametes
            Cohesin proteins break down and the                 b. cells in G0
            sister chromatids separate.                         c. cancer cells
        b. The kinetochore becomes attached to the              d. stem cells
            mitotic spindle. Cohesin proteins break
            down and the sister chromatids separate.      21. Which negative regulatory molecule can trigger
            Sister chromatids line up at the                  cell suicide (apoptosis) if vital cell cycle events
            metaphase plate. The nucleus reforms and          do not occur?
            the cell divides.                                   a. p53
        c. The kinetochore becomes attached to the              b. p21
            cohesin proteins. Sister chromatids line up         c. retinoblastoma protein (Rb)
            at the metaphase plate. The kinetochore             d. cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk)
            breaks down and the sister chromatids
            separate. The nucleus reforms and the cell    22. ___________ are changes to the order of
            divides.                                          nucleotides in a segment of DNA that codes for a
        d. The kinetochore becomes attached to the            protein.
            mitotic spindle. Sister chromatids line up          a. Proto-oncogenes
            at the metaphase plate. Cohesin proteins            b. Tumor suppressor genes
            break down and the sister chromatids                c. Gene mutations
            separate. The nucleus reforms and the cell          d. Negative regulators
            divides.
                                                          23. A gene that codes for a positive cell-cycle
  16. At which of the cell-cycle checkpoints do               regulator is called a(n) _____.
      external forces have the greatest influence?              a. kinase inhibitor.
        a. G1 checkpoint                                        b. tumor suppressor gene.
        b. G2 checkpoint                                        c. proto-oncogene.
        c. M checkpoint                                         d. oncogene.



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              10 • Critical Thinking Questions   293



 24. A mutated gene that codes for an altered version     26. Which eukaryotic cell-cycle event is missing in
     of Cdk that is active in the absence of cyclin is        binary fission?
     a(n) _____.                                                a. cell growth
       a. kinase inhibitor.                                     b. DNA duplication
       b. tumor suppressor gene.                                c. karyokinesis
        c. proto-oncogene.                                      d. cytokinesis
       d. oncogene.
                                                          27. FtsZ proteins direct the formation of a _______
 25. Which molecule is a Cdk inhibitor that is                that will eventually form the new cell walls of the
     controlled by p53?                                       daughter cells.
       a. cyclin                                                a. contractile ring
       b. anti-kinase                                           b. cell plate
       c. Rb                                                    c. cytoskeleton
       d. p21                                                   d. septum


Critical Thinking Questions
 28. Compare and contrast a human somatic cell to a       36. Describe the general conditions that must be
     human gamete.                                            met at each of the three main cell-cycle
                                                              checkpoints.
 29. What is the relationship between a genome,
     chromosomes, and genes?                              37. Compare and contrast the roles of the positive
                                                              cell-cycle regulators negative regulators.
 30. Eukaryotic chromosomes are thousands of times
     longer than a typical cell. Explain how              38. What steps are necessary for Cdk to become
     chromosomes can fit inside a eukaryotic                  fully active?
     nucleus.
                                                          39. Rb is a negative regulator that blocks the cell
 31. Briefly describe the events that occur in each           cycle at the G1 checkpoint until the cell achieves
     phase of interphase.                                     a requisite size. What molecular mechanism
                                                              does Rb employ to halt the cell cycle?
 32. Chemotherapy drugs such as vincristine (derived
     from Madagascar periwinkle plants) and               40. Outline the steps that lead to a cell becoming
     colchicine (derived from autumn crocus plants)           cancerous.
     disrupt mitosis by binding to tubulin (the subunit
                                                          41. Explain the difference between a proto-
     of microtubules) and interfering with
                                                              oncogene and a tumor-suppressor gene.
     microtubule assembly and disassembly. Exactly
     what mitotic structure is targeted by these drugs    42. List the regulatory mechanisms that might be
     and what effect would that have on cell division?        lost in a cell producing faulty p53.

 33. Describe the similarities and differences            43. p53 can trigger apoptosis if certain cell-cycle
     between the cytokinesis mechanisms found in              events fail. How does this regulatory outcome
     animal cells versus those in plant cells.                benefit a multicellular organism?

 34. List some reasons why a cell that has just           44. Name the common components of eukaryotic
     completed cytokinesis might enter the G0 phase           cell division and binary fission.
     instead of the G1 phase.
                                                          45. Describe how the duplicated bacterial
 35. What cell-cycle events will be affected in a cell        chromosomes are distributed into new daughter
     that produces mutated (non-functional) cohesin           cells without the direction of the mitotic spindle.
     protein?
294   10 • Critical Thinking Questions




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 11
Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction




FIGURE 11.1 Each of us, like the organisms shown above, begins life as a fertilized egg (zygote). After trillions of cell
divisions, each of us develops into a complex, multicellular organism. (credit a: modification of work by Frank
Wouters; credit b: modification of work by Ken Cole, USGS; credit c: modification of work by Martin Pettitt)


CHAPTER OUTLINE
11.1 The Process of Meiosis
11.2 Sexual Reproduction


INTRODUCTION The ability to reproduce is a basic characteristic of all organisms:
Hippopotamuses give birth to hippopotamus calves; Joshua trees produce seeds from which
Joshua tree seedlings emerge; and adult flamingos lay eggs that hatch into flamingo chicks.
However, unlike the organisms shown above, offspring may or may not resemble their parents. For
example, in the case of most insects such as butterflies (with a complete metamorphosis), the
larval forms rarely resemble the adult forms.

Although many unicellular organisms and a few multicellular organisms can produce genetically
identical clones of themselves through asexual reproduction, many single-celled organisms and
most multicellular organisms reproduce regularly using another method—sexual reproduction.
This highly evolved method involves the production by parents of two haploid cells and the fusion
of two haploid cells to form a single, genetically recombined diploid cell—a genetically unique
organism. In almost all sexually reproducing species, these two haploid cells differ in size, with
the smaller cell called “male” and the larger one called “female." These haploid cells are produced
by a type of cell division called meiosis. Sexual reproduction, involving both meiosis and
fertilization, introduces variation into offspring that may account for the evolutionary success of
sexual reproduction. The vast majority of eukaryotic organisms, both multicellular and unicellular,
can or must employ some form of meiosis and fertilization to reproduce.

In most plants and animals the zygote formed by fertilization, through thousands of rounds of
mitotic cell division, will develop into an adult organism.
296   11 • Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction




      11.1 The Process of Meiosis
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe the behavior of chromosomes during meiosis, and the differences between the first
            and second meiotic divisions
         • Describe the cellular events that take place during meiosis
         • Explain the differences between meiosis and mitosis
         • Explain the mechanisms within the meiotic process that produce genetic variation among
            the haploid gametes

      Sexual reproduction requires the union of two specialized cells, called gametes, each of which
      contains one set of chromosomes. When gametes unite, they form a zygote, or fertilized egg that
      contains two sets of chromosomes. (Note: Cells that contain one set of chromosomes are called
      haploid; cells containing two sets of chromosomes are called diploid.) If the reproductive cycle is
      to continue for any sexually reproducing species, then the diploid cell must somehow reduce its
      number of chromosome sets to produce haploid gametes; otherwise, the number of chromosome
      sets will double with every future round of fertilization. Therefore, sexual reproduction requires a
      nuclear division that reduces the number of chromosome sets by half.

      Most animals and plants and many unicellular organisms are diploid and therefore have two sets
      of chromosomes. In each somatic cell of the organism (all cells of a multicellular organism except
      the gametes or reproductive cells), the nucleus contains two copies of each chromosome, called
      homologous chromosomes. Homologous chromosomes are matched pairs containing the same
      genes in identical locations along their lengths. Diploid organisms inherit one copy of each
      homologous chromosome from each genetic contributor.

      Meiosis is the nuclear division that forms haploid cells from diploid cells, and it employs many of
      the same cellular mechanisms as mitosis. However, as you have learned, mitosis produces
      daughter cells whose nuclei are genetically identical to the original parent nucleus. In mitosis,
      both the parent and the daughter nuclei are at the same “ploidy level”—diploid in the case of most
      multicellular animals. Plants use mitosis to grow as sporophytes, and to grow and produce eggs
      and sperm as gametophytes; so they use mitosis for both haploid and diploid cells (as well as for
      all other ploidies). In meiosis, the starting nucleus is always diploid and the daughter nuclei that
      result are haploid. To achieve this reduction in chromosome number, meiosis consists of one
      round of chromosome replication followed by two rounds of nuclear division. Because many
      events that occur during each of the division stages are analogous to the events of mitosis, the
      same stage names are assigned. However, because there are two rounds of division, the major
      process and the stages are designated with a “I” or a “II.” Thus, meiosis I is the first round of
      meiotic division and consists of prophase I, prometaphase I, and so on. Likewise, Meiosis II
      (during which the second round of meiotic division takes place) includes prophase II,
      prometaphase II, and so on.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         11.1 • The Process of Meiosis     297




FIGURE 11.2 Overview of Meiosis. The production of gametes is a crucial process for sexually reproducing organisms. Meiosis is the
mechanism used to reduce diploid cells to haploid gametes while introducing genetic diversity. Prior to meiosis, chromosomes are
replicated in S-phase to ensure proper number of chromosomes in the resulting gametes. During meiosis, two successive rounds of division
reduces the number of chromosomes (ploidy) of the cell by half. going from diploid cells to haploid gametes. Credit: Rao, A., Tag, A,
Fletcher, S., and Ryan, K. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

Meiosis I
Meiosis is preceded by an interphase consisting of G1, S, and G2 phases, which are nearly identical to the phases
preceding mitosis. The G1 phase (the “first gap phase”) is focused on cell growth. During the S phase—the second
phase of interphase—the cell copies or replicates the DNA of the chromosomes. Finally, in the G2 phase (the
“second gap phase”) the cell undergoes the final preparations for meiosis.

During DNA duplication in the S phase, each chromosome is replicated to produce two identical copies—sister
chromatids that are held together at the centromere by cohesin proteins, which hold the chromatids together until
anaphase II. (Note: these chromosome copies are called sister chromatids regardless of whether they are in a
female gamete or a male gamete.)

Prophase I
Early in prophase I, before the chromosomes can be seen clearly with a microscope, the homologous chromosomes
are attached at their tips to the nuclear envelope by proteins. As the nuclear envelope begins to break down, the
proteins associated with homologous chromosomes bring the pair closer together. Recall that in mitosis,
homologous chromosomes do not pair together. The synaptonemal complex, a lattice of proteins between the
homologous chromosomes, first forms at specific locations and then spreads outward to cover the entire length of
the chromosomes. The tight pairing of the homologous chromosomes is called synapsis. In synapsis, the genes on
298   11 • Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction



      the chromatids of the homologous chromosomes are aligned precisely with each other. The synaptonemal complex
      supports the exchange of chromosomal segments between homologous nonsister chromatids—a process called
      crossing over. Crossing over can be observed visually after the exchange as chiasmata (singular = chiasma) (Figure
      11.3).

      In humans, even though the X and Y sex chromosomes are not completely homologous (that is, most of their genes
      differ), there is a small region of homology that allows the X and Y chromosomes to pair up during prophase I. A
      partial synaptonemal complex develops only between the regions of homology.




      FIGURE 11.3 Early in prophase I, homologous chromosomes come together to form a synapse. The chromosomes are bound tightly
      together and in perfect alignment by a protein lattice called a synaptonemal complex and by cohesin proteins at the centromere.

      Located at intervals along the synaptonemal complex are large protein assemblies called recombination nodules.
      These assemblies mark the points of later chiasmata and mediate the multistep process of crossover—or genetic
      recombination—between the nonsister chromatids. Near the recombination nodule, the double-stranded DNA of
      each chromatid is cleaved, the cut ends are modified, and a new connection is made between the nonsister
      chromatids. As prophase I progresses, the synaptonemal complex begins to break down and the chromosomes
      begin to condense. When the synaptonemal complex is gone, the homologous chromosomes remain attached to
      each other at the centromere and at chiasmata. The chiasmata remain until anaphase I. The number of chiasmata
      varies according to the species and the length of the chromosome. There must be at least one chiasma per
      chromosome for proper separation of homologous chromosomes during meiosis I, but there may be as many as 25.
      Following crossover, the synaptonemal complex breaks down and the cohesin connection between homologous
      pairs is removed. At the end of prophase I, the pairs are held together only at the chiasmata (Figure 11.4). These
      pairs are called tetrads because a total of four sister chromatids of each pair of homologous chromosomes are now
      visible.

      The crossover events are the first source of genetic variation in the nuclei produced by meiosis. A single crossover
      event between homologous nonsister chromatids leads to a reciprocal exchange of equivalent DNA between an egg-
      derived chromosome and a sperm-derived chromosome. When a recombinant sister chromatid is moved into a
      gamete cell it will carry a combination of maternal and paternal genes that did not exist before the crossover.
      Crossover events can occur almost anywhere along the length of the synapsed chromosomes. Different cells
      undergoing meiosis will therefore produce different recombinant chromatids, with varying combinations of maternal
      and parental genes. Multiple crossovers in an arm of the chromosome have the same effect, exchanging segments
      of DNA to produce genetically recombined chromosomes.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      11.1 • The Process of Meiosis   299




FIGURE 11.4 Crossover occurs between nonsister chromatids of homologous chromosomes. The result is an exchange of genetic material
between homologous chromosomes (for clarity, only one recombination event between two of the four chromatids is represented).

Prometaphase I
The key event in prometaphase I is the attachment of the spindle fiber microtubules to the kinetochore proteins at
the centromeres. Kinetochore proteins are multiprotein complexes that bind the centromeres of a chromosome to
the microtubules of the mitotic spindle. Microtubules grow from microtubule-organizing centers (MTOCs). In animal
cells, MTOCs are centrosomes located at opposite poles of the cell. The microtubules from each pole move toward
the middle of the cell and attach to one of the kinetochores of the two fused homologous chromosomes. Each
member of the homologous pair attaches to a microtubule extending from opposite poles of the cell so that in the
next phase, the microtubules can pull the homologous pair apart. A spindle fiber that has attached to a kinetochore
is called a kinetochore microtubule. At the end of prometaphase I, each tetrad is attached to microtubules from
both poles, with one homologous chromosome facing each pole. The homologous chromosomes are still held
together at the chiasmata. In addition, the nuclear membrane has broken down entirely.

Metaphase I
During metaphase I, the homologous chromosomes are arranged at the metaphase plate—roughly in the midline of
the cell, with the kinetochores facing opposite poles. Each homologous pair is oriented randomly at the equator. For
example, if the two homologous members of chromosome 1 are labeled a and b, then the chromosomes could line
up a-b or b-a. This is important in determining the genes carried by a gamete, as each will only receive one of the
two homologous chromosomes. (Recall that homologous chromosomes are not identical. They contain different
versions of the same genes, and after recombination during crossing over, each gamete will have a unique genetic
makeup that has never existed before.)

The randomness in the alignment of recombined chromosomes at the metaphase plate, coupled with the crossing
over events between nonsister chromatids, are responsible for much of the genetic variation in the offspring. To
300   11 • Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction



      clarify this further, remember that the homologous chromosomes of a sexually reproducing organism are originally
      inherited as two separate sets, one from each parent. Using humans as an example, one set of 23 chromosomes is
      present in the egg cell, often called maternal chromosomes because the genetic contributor is often the mother. The
      other set of 23 chromosomes is contained in the sperm, and the genetic contributor is called a father who provides
      the paternal chromosomes. Every cell of the multicellular offspring has copies of the original two sets of
      homologous chromosomes. When the offspring human creates their own gametes through meiosis, the two sets of
      chromosomes will be rearranged. In prophase I of meiosis, the homologous chromosomes form the tetrads. In
      metaphase I, these pairs line up at the midway point between the two poles of the cell to form the metaphase plate.
      Because there is an equal chance that a microtubule fiber will encounter a maternally or paternally inherited
      chromosome, the arrangement of the tetrads at the metaphase plate is random. Thus, any maternally inherited
      chromosome may face either pole. Likewise, any paternally inherited chromosome may also face either pole. The
      orientation of each tetrad is independent of the orientation of the other 22 tetrads.

      This event—the random (or independent) assortment of homologous chromosomes at the metaphase plate—is the
      second mechanism that introduces variation into the gametes or spores. In each cell that undergoes meiosis, the
      arrangement of the tetrads is different. The number of variations is dependent on the number of chromosomes
      making up a set. There are two possibilities for orientation at the metaphase plate; the possible number of
      alignments therefore equals 2n in a diploid cell, where n is the number of chromosomes per haploid set. Humans
      have 23 chromosome pairs, which results in over eight million (223) possible genetically-distinct gametes just from
      the random alignment of chromosomes at the metaphase plate. This number does not include the variability that
      was previously produced by crossing over between the nonsister chromatids. Given these two mechanisms, it is
      highly unlikely that any two haploid cells resulting from meiosis will have the same genetic composition (Figure
      11.5).

      To summarize, meiosis I creates genetically diverse gametes in two ways. First, during prophase I, crossover events
      between the nonsister chromatids of each homologous pair of chromosomes generate recombinant chromatids with
      new combinations of maternal and paternal genes. Second, the random assortment of tetrads on the metaphase
      plate produces unique combinations of maternal and paternal chromosomes that will make their way into the
      gametes.




      FIGURE 11.5 Random, independent assortment during metaphase I is demonstrated by considering a cell with a set of two chromosomes
      (n = 2). There are two possible homologous chromosome arrangements at the equatorial plane in metaphase I, that are then separated
      during anaphase I. The total possible number of different gametes is 2n, where n equals the number of chromosomes in a set. In this
      example, there are four possible genetic combinations for the gametes. With n = 23 in human cells, there are over eight million possible




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         11.1 • The Process of Meiosis   301



combinations of paternal and maternal chromosomes. Credit: Rao, A.and Fletcher, S. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

Anaphase I
In anaphase I, the microtubules pull the linked chromosomes apart. The sister chromatids remain tightly bound
together at the centromere. The chiasmata are broken in anaphase I as the microtubules attached to the fused
kinetochores pull the homologous chromosomes apart (Figure 11.6).

Telophase I and Cytokinesis
In telophase, the separated chromosomes arrive at opposite poles. The remainder of the typical telophase events
may or may not occur, depending on the species. In some organisms, the chromosomes “decondense” and nuclear
envelopes form around the separated sets of chromatids produced during telophase I. In other organisms,
cytokinesis—the physical separation of the cytoplasmic components into two daughter cells—occurs without
reformation of the nuclei. In nearly all species of animals and some fungi, cytokinesis separates the cell contents via
a cleavage furrow (constriction of the actin ring that leads to cytoplasmic division). In plants, a cell plate is formed
during cell cytokinesis by Golgi vesicles fusing at the metaphase plate. This cell plate will ultimately lead to the
formation of cell walls that separate the two daughter cells.

Two haploid cells are the result of the first meiotic division of a diploid cell. The cells are haploid because at each
pole, there is just one of each pair of the homologous chromosomes. Therefore, only one full set of the
chromosomes is present. This is why the cells are considered haploid—there is only one chromosome set, even
though each chromosome still consists of two sister chromatids. Recall that sister chromatids are merely duplicates
of one of the two homologous chromosomes (except for changes that occurred during crossing over). In meiosis II,
these two sister chromatids will separate, creating four haploid daughter cells.

     LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this video about meiosis (https://openstax.org/l/animal_meiosis) to review the process.


Meiosis II
In some species, cells enter a brief interphase, or interkinesis, before entering meiosis II. Interkinesis lacks an S
phase, so chromosomes are not duplicated. The two cells produced in meiosis I go through the events of meiosis II
in synchrony. During meiosis II, the sister chromatids within the two daughter cells separate, forming four new
haploid gametes. The mechanics of meiosis II are similar to mitosis, except that each dividing cell has only one set
of homologous chromosomes, each with two chromatids. Therefore, each cell has half the number of sister
chromatids to separate out as a diploid cell undergoing mitosis. In terms of chromosomal content, cells at the start
of meiosis II are similar to haploid cells in G2, preparing to undergo mitosis.

Prophase II
If the chromosomes decondensed in telophase I, they condense again. If nuclear envelopes were formed, they
fragment into vesicles. The MTOCs that were duplicated during interkinesis move away from each other toward
opposite poles, and new spindles are formed.

Prometaphase II
The nuclear envelopes are completely broken down, and the spindle is fully formed. Each sister chromatid forms an
individual kinetochore that attaches to microtubules from opposite poles.

Metaphase II
The sister chromatids are maximally condensed and aligned at the equator of the cell.

Anaphase II
The sister chromatids are pulled apart by the kinetochore microtubules and move toward opposite poles.
Nonkinetochore microtubules elongate the cell.
302   11 • Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction




      FIGURE 11.6 The process of chromosome alignment differs between meiosis I and meiosis II. In prophase I, pairs of homologous
      chromosomes form chiasmata which allow for crossing over events (genetic diversity). These pairs of homologous chromosomes arrange at
      the metaphase plate in metaphase I. In anaphase I, homologous chromosomes separate. Telophase I and cytokinesis result in haploid
      cells with 2 sister chromatids of each chromosome. In prophase II, spindle microtubules form and elongate and any nuclear envelope
      disappears. Sister chromatids arrange at the midpoint of the cells in metaphase II. In anaphase II, the sister chromatids separate.
      Telophase II and cytokinesis result in haploid cells with a single copy of each chromosome. Credit: Rao, A., Ryan, K., Fletcher, S. and Tag, A.
      Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

      Telophase II and Cytokinesis
      The chromosomes arrive at opposite poles and begin to decondense. Nuclear envelopes form around the
      chromosomes. If the parent cell was diploid, as is most commonly the case, then cytokinesis now separates the two
      cells into four unique haploid cells. The cells produced are genetically unique because of the random assortment of
      paternal and maternal homologs and because of the recombination of maternal and paternal segments of
      chromosomes (with their sets of genes) that occurs during crossover. The entire process of meiosis is outlined in
      Figure 11.7.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           11.1 • The Process of Meiosis   303




FIGURE 11.7 An animal cell with a diploid number of four (2n = 4) proceeds through the stages of meiosis to form four haploid daughter
cells.

Comparing Meiosis and Mitosis
Mitosis and meiosis are both forms of division of the nucleus in eukaryotic cells. They share some similarities, but
also exhibit a number of distinct processes that lead to very different outcomes (Figure 11.8). Mitosis is a single
nuclear division that results in two nuclei that are usually partitioned into two new cells. The nuclei resulting from a
mitotic division are genetically identical to the original nucleus. They have the same number of sets of
chromosomes: one set in the case of haploid cells and two sets in the case of diploid cells. In contrast, meiosis
consists of two nuclear divisions resulting in four nuclei that are usually partitioned into four new, genetically
distinct cells. The four nuclei produced during meiosis are not genetically identical, and they contain one
chromosome set only. This is half the number of chromosome sets of the original cell, which is diploid.
304   11 • Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction



      The main differences between mitosis and meiosis occur in meiosis I, which is a very different nuclear division than
      mitosis. In meiosis I, the homologous chromosome pairs physically meet and are bound together with the
      synaptonemal complex. Following this, the chromosomes develop chiasmata and undergo crossover between
      nonsister chromatids. In the end, the chromosomes line up along the metaphase plate as tetrads—with kinetochore
      fibers from opposite spindle poles attached to each kinetochore of a homolog to form a tetrad. All of these events
      occur only in meiosis I.

      When the chiasmata resolve and the tetrad is broken up with the homologous chromosomes moving to one pole or
      another, the ploidy level—the number of sets of chromosomes in each future nucleus—has been reduced from two to
      one. For this reason, meiosis I is referred to as a reductional division. There is no such reduction in ploidy level
      during mitosis.

      Meiosis II is analogous to a mitotic division. In this case, the duplicated chromosomes (only one set of them) line up
      on the metaphase plate with divided kinetochores attached to kinetochore fibers from opposite poles. During
      anaphase II, as in mitotic anaphase, the kinetochores divide and one sister chromatid—now referred to as a
      chromosome—is pulled to one pole while the other sister chromatid is pulled to the other pole. If it were not for the
      fact that there had been crossover, the two products of each individual meiosis II division would be identical (as in
      mitosis). Instead, they are different because there has always been at least one crossover per chromosome. Meiosis
      II is not a reduction division because although there are fewer copies of the genome in the resulting cells, there is
      still one set of chromosomes, as there was at the end of meiosis I.




      FIGURE 11.8 Meiosis and mitosis are both preceded by one cycle of DNA replication; however, meiosis includes two nuclear divisions. The



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                 11.2 • Sexual Reproduction   305



four daughter cells resulting from meiosis are haploid and genetically distinct. The daughter cells resulting from mitosis are diploid and
identical to the parent cell.



        EVOLUTION CONNECTION

The Mystery of the Evolution of Meiosis
Some characteristics of organisms are so widespread and fundamental that it is sometimes difficult to remember
that they evolved like other simple traits. Meiosis is such an extraordinarily complex series of cellular events that
biologists have had trouble testing hypotheses concerning how it may have evolved. Although meiosis is inextricably
entwined with sexual reproduction and its advantages and disadvantages, it is important to separate the questions
of the evolution of meiosis and the evolution of sex, because early meiosis may have been advantageous for
different reasons than it is now. Thinking outside the box and imagining what the early benefits from meiosis might
have been is one approach to uncovering how it may have evolved.

Meiosis and mitosis share obvious cellular processes, and it makes sense that meiosis evolved from mitosis. The
                                                                                                       1
difficulty lies in the clear differences between meiosis I and mitosis. Adam Wilkins and Robin Holliday summarized
the unique events that needed to occur for the evolution of meiosis from mitosis. These steps are homologous
chromosome pairing and synapsis, crossover exchanges, sister chromatids remaining attached during anaphase,
and suppression of DNA replication in interphase. They argue that the first step is the hardest and most important
and that understanding how it evolved would make the evolutionary process clearer. They suggest genetic
experiments that might shed light on the evolution of synapsis.

There are other approaches to understanding the evolution of meiosis in progress. Different forms of meiosis exist in
single-celled protists. Some appear to be simpler or more “primitive” forms of meiosis. Comparing the meiotic
                                                                                                          2
divisions of different protists may shed light on the evolution of meiosis. Marilee Ramesh and colleagues compared
the genes involved in meiosis in protists to understand when and where meiosis might have evolved. Although
research is still ongoing, recent scholarship into meiosis in protists suggests that some aspects of meiosis may have
evolved later than others. This kind of genetic comparison can tell us what aspects of meiosis are the oldest and
what cellular processes they may have borrowed from in earlier cells.


     LINK TO LEARNING
Click through the steps of this interactive animation to compare the meiotic process of cell division to that of mitosis
at How Cells Divide (https://openstax.org/l/how_cells_dvide).


11.2 Sexual Reproduction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Explain that meiosis and sexual reproduction are highly evolved traits
   • Identify variation among offspring as a potential evolutionary advantage of sexual reproduction
   • Describe the three different life-cycle types among sexually reproducing multicellular organisms.

Sexual reproduction was likely an early evolutionary innovation after the appearance of eukaryotic cells. It appears
to have been very successful because most eukaryotes are able to reproduce sexually and, in many animals, it is the
only mode of reproduction. And yet, scientists also recognize some real disadvantages to sexual reproduction. On
the surface, creating offspring that are genetic clones of the parent appears to be a better system. If the parent
organism is successfully occupying a habitat, offspring with the same traits should be similarly successful. There is
also the obvious benefit to an organism that can produce offspring whenever circumstances are favorable by
asexual budding, fragmentation, or by producing eggs asexually. These methods of reproduction do not require a
partner with which to reproduce. Indeed, some organisms that lead a solitary lifestyle have retained the ability to

1 Adam S. Wilkins and Robin Holliday, “The Evolution of Meiosis from Mitosis,” Genetics 181 (2009): 3–12.
2 Marilee A. Ramesh, Shehre-Banoo Malik and John M. Logsdon, Jr, “A Phylogenetic Inventory of Meiotic Genes: Evidence for Sex in
Giardia and an Early Eukaryotic Origin of Meiosis,” Current Biology 15 (2005):185–91.
306   11 • Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction



      reproduce asexually. In addition, in asexual populations, every individual is capable of reproduction. In sexual
      populations, the males are not producing the offspring themselves, so hypothetically an asexual population could
      grow twice as fast.

      However, multicellular organisms that exclusively depend on asexual reproduction are exceedingly rare. Why are
      meiosis and sexual reproductive strategies so common? These are important (and as yet unanswered) questions in
      biology, even though they have been the focus of much research beginning in the latter half of the 20th century.
      There are several possible explanations, one of which is that the variation that sexual reproduction creates among
      offspring is very important to the survival and reproduction of the population. Thus, on average, a sexually
      reproducing population will leave more descendants than an otherwise similar asexually reproducing population.
      The only source of variation in asexual organisms is mutation. Mutations that take place during the formation of
      germ cell lines are also a source of variation in sexually reproducing organisms. However, in contrast to mutation
      during asexual reproduction, the mutations during sexual reproduction can be continually reshuffled from one
      generation to the next when different parents combine their unique genomes and the genes are mixed into different
      combinations by crossovers during prophase I and random assortment at metaphase I.



              EVOLUTION CONNECTION

      The Red Queen Hypothesis
      Genetic variation is the outcome of sexual reproduction, but why are ongoing variations necessary, even under
      seemingly stable environmental conditions? Enter the Red Queen hypothesis, first proposed by Leigh Van Valen in
            3
      1973. The concept was named in reference to the Red Queen's race in Lewis Carroll's book, Through the Looking-
      Glass.

      All species coevolve (evolve together) with other organisms. For example, predators evolve with their prey, and
      parasites evolve with their hosts. Each tiny advantage gained by favorable variation gives a species a reproductive
      edge over close competitors, predators, parasites, or even prey. However, survival of any given genotype or
      phenotype in a population is dependent on the reproductive fitness of other genotypes or phenotypes within a given
      species. The only method that will allow a coevolving species to maintain its own share of the resources is to also
      continually improve its fitness (the capacity of the members to produce more reproductively viable offspring relative
      to others within a species). As one species gains an advantage, this increases selection on the other species; they
      must also develop an advantage or they will be outcompeted. No single species progresses too far ahead because
      genetic variation among the progeny of sexual reproduction provides all species with a mechanism to improve
      rapidly. Species that cannot keep up become extinct. The Red Queen’s catchphrase was, “It takes all the running
      you can do to stay in the same place.” This is an apt description of coevolution between competing species.


      Life Cycles of Sexually Reproducing Organisms
      Fertilization and meiosis alternate in sexual life cycles. What happens between these two events depends on the
      organism’s “reproductive strategy.” The process of meiosis reduces the chromosome number by half. Fertilization,
      the joining of two haploid gametes, restores the diploid condition. Some organisms have a multicellular diploid stage
      that is most obvious and only produce haploid reproductive cells. Animals, including humans, have this type of life
      cycle. Other organisms, such as fungi, have a multicellular haploid stage that is most obvious. Plants and some algae
      have alternation of generations, in which they have multicellular diploid and haploid life stages that are apparent to
      different degrees depending on the group.

      Nearly all animals employ a diploid-dominant life-cycle strategy in which the only haploid cells produced by the
      organism are the gametes. Early in the development of the embryo, specialized diploid cells, called germ cells, are
      produced within the gonads (such as the testes and ovaries). Germ cells are capable of mitosis to perpetuate the
      germ cell line and meiosis to produce haploid gametes. Once the haploid gametes are formed, they lose the ability
      to divide again. There is no multicellular haploid life stage. Fertilization occurs with the fusion of two gametes,
      usually from different individuals, restoring the diploid state (Figure 11.9).



      3 Leigh Van Valen, “A New Evolutionary Law,” Evolutionary Theory 1 (1973): 1–30



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               11.2 • Sexual Reproduction   307




FIGURE 11.9 In animals, sexually reproducing adults form haploid gametes, called egg and sperm, from diploid germ cells. Fusion of the
two gametes gives rise to a fertilized egg cell, or zygote. The zygote will undergo multiple rounds of mitosis to produce a multicellular
offspring. The germ cells are generated early in the development of the zygote.

Most fungi and algae employ a life-cycle type in which the “body” of the organism—the ecologically important part
of the life cycle—is haploid. The haploid cells that make up the tissues of the dominant multicellular stage are
formed by mitosis. During sexual reproduction, specialized haploid cells from two individuals—designated the (+)
and (−) mating types—join to form a diploid zygote. The zygote immediately undergoes meiosis to form four haploid
cells called spores. Although these spores are haploid like the “parents,” they contain a new genetic combination
from two parents. The spores can remain dormant for various time periods. Eventually, when conditions are
favorable, the spores form multicellular haploid structures through many rounds of mitosis (Figure 11.10).



        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 11.10 Fungi, such as black bread mold (Rhizopus nigricans), have a haploid multicellular stage that produces specialized haploid
cells by mitosis that fuse to form a diploid zygote. The zygote undergoes meiosis to produce haploid spores. Each spore gives rise to a
308   11 • Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction



      multicellular haploid organism by mitosis. Above, different mating hyphae types (denoted as + and –) join to form a zygospore through
      nuclear fusion. (credit “zygomycota” micrograph: modification of work by “Fanaberka”/Wikimedia Commons)

      If a mutation occurs so that a fungus is no longer able to produce a minus mating type, will it still be able to
      reproduce?


      The third life-cycle type, employed by some algae and all plants, is a blend of the haploid-dominant and diploid-
      dominant extremes. Species with alternation of generations have both haploid and diploid multicellular organisms
      as part of their life cycle. The haploid multicellular plants are called gametophytes, because they produce gametes
      from specialized cells. Meiosis is not directly involved in the production of gametes in this case, because the
      organism that produces the gametes is already haploid. Fertilization between the gametes forms a diploid zygote.
      The zygote will undergo many rounds of mitosis and give rise to a diploid multicellular plant called a sporophyte.
      Specialized cells of the sporophyte will undergo meiosis and produce haploid spores. The spores will subsequently
      develop into the gametophytes (Figure 11.11).




      FIGURE 11.11 Plants have a life cycle that alternates between a multicellular haploid organism and a multicellular diploid organism. In
      some plants, such as ferns, both the haploid and diploid plant stages are free-living. The diploid plant is called a sporophyte because it
      produces haploid spores by meiosis. The spores develop into multicellular, haploid plants that are called gametophytes because they
      produce gametes. The gametes of two individuals will fuse to form a diploid zygote that becomes the sporophyte. (credit “fern”:
      modification of work by Cory Zanker; credit “sporangia”: modification of work by "Obsidian Soul"/Wikimedia Commons; credit
      “gametophyte and sporophyte”: modification of work by “Vlmastra”/Wikimedia Commons)

      Although all plants utilize some version of the alternation of generations, the relative size of the sporophyte and the
      gametophyte and the relationship between them vary greatly. In plants such as moss, the gametophyte organism is
      the free-living plant and the sporophyte is physically dependent on the gametophyte. In other plants, such as ferns,
      both the gametophyte and sporophyte plants are free-living; however, the sporophyte is much larger. In seed plants,
      such as magnolia trees and daisies, the gametophyte is composed of only a few cells and, in the case of the female
      gametophyte, is completely retained within the sporophyte.

      Sexual reproduction takes many forms in multicellular organisms. The fact that nearly every multicellular organism
      on Earth employs sexual reproduction is strong evidence for the benefits of producing offspring with unique gene
      combinations, though there are other possible benefits as well.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 11 • Key Terms   309




Key Terms
alternation of generations life-cycle type in which        meiosis II second round of meiotic cell division
    the diploid and haploid stages alternate                  following meiosis I; sister chromatids are separated
chiasmata (singular, chiasma) the structure that              into individual chromosomes, and the result is four
    forms at the crossover points after genetic material      unique haploid cells
    is exchanged                                           recombination nodules protein assemblies formed
cohesin proteins that form a complex that seals sister        on the synaptonemal complex that mark the points
    chromatids together at their centromeres until            of crossover events and mediate the multistep
    anaphase II of meiosis                                    process of genetic recombination between nonsister
crossover exchange of genetic material between                chromatids of a homologous pair
    nonsister chromatids resulting in chromosomes that     reduction division nuclear division that produces
    incorporate genes from both parents of the                daughter nuclei each having one-half as many
    organism                                                  chromosome sets as the parental nucleus; meiosis I
fertilization union of two haploid cells from two             is a reduction division
    individual organisms                                   somatic cell all the cells of a multicellular organism
gametophyte a multicellular haploid life-cycle stage          except the gametes or reproductive cells
    that produces gametes                                  spore haploid cell that can produce a haploid
germ cells specialized cell line that produces                multicellular organism or can fuse with another
    gametes, such as eggs or sperm                            spore to form a diploid cell
interkinesis (also, interphase II) brief period of rest    sporophyte a multicellular diploid life-cycle stage
    between meiosis I and meiosis II                          that produces haploid spores by meiosis
life cycle the sequence of events in the development       synapsis formation of a close association between
    of an organism and the production of cells that           homologous chromosomes during prophase I
    produce offspring                                      synaptonemal complex protein lattice that forms
meiosis a nuclear division process that results in four       between homologous chromosomes during
    haploid cells                                             prophase I, supporting crossover
meiosis I first round of meiotic cell division; referred   tetrad two duplicated homologous chromosomes
    to as reduction division because the ploidy level is      (four chromatids) bound together by chiasmata
    reduced from diploid to haploid                           during prophase I

Chapter Summary
11.1 The Process of Meiosis                                metaphase I. The cells that are produced by meiosis
                                                           are genetically unique.
Sexual reproduction requires that organisms produce
cells that can fuse during fertilization to produce        Meiosis and mitosis share similar processes, but have
offspring. In most organisms, fertilization occurs         distinct outcomes. Mitotic divisions are single nuclear
between two haploid cells, the larger being called         divisions that produce genetically identical daughter
“female” or “egg” and the smaller being called “male”      nuclei (i.e., each daughter nucleus has the same
or “sperm." In most animals, meiosis is used to            number of chromosome sets as the original cell). In
produce haploid eggs and sperm from diploid parent         contrast, meiotic divisions include two nuclear
cells so that the fusion of an egg and sperm produces a    divisions that ultimately produce four genetically
diploid zygote. As with mitosis, DNA replication occurs    different daughter nuclei that have only one
prior to meiosis during the S-phase of the cell cycle so   chromosome set (instead of the two sets of
that each chromosome becomes a pair of sister              chromosomes in the parent cell). The main differences
chromatids. In meiosis, there are two rounds of nuclear    between the two nuclear division processes take place
division resulting in four nuclei and usually four         during the first division of meiosis: homologous
daughter cells, each with half the number of               chromosomes pair, crossover, and exchange
chromosomes as the parent cell. The first division         homologous nonsister chromatid segments. The
separates homologous chromosomes, and the                  homologous chromosomes separate into different
second—like mitosis—separates chromatids into              nuclei during meiosis I, causing a reduction of ploidy
individual chromosomes. Meiosis generates variation in     level in the first division. The second division of meiosis
the daughter nuclei during crossover in prophase I as      is similar to a mitotic division, except that the daughter
well as during the random alignment of tetrads at          cells do not contain identical genomes because of
310   11 • Visual Connection Questions



crossover and chromosome recombination in prophase           The process of meiosis produces unique reproductive
I.                                                           cells called gametes, which have half the number of
                                                             chromosomes as the parent cell. When two haploid
11.2 Sexual Reproduction                                     gametes fuse, this restores the diploid condition in the
Nearly all eukaryotes undergo sexual reproduction. The       new zygote. Thus, most sexually reproducing
variation introduced into the reproductive cells by          organisms alternate between haploid and diploid
meiosis provides an important advantage that has             stages. However, the ways in which reproductive cells
made sexual reproduction evolutionarily successful.          are produced and the timing between meiosis and
Meiosis and fertilization alternate in sexual life cycles.   fertilization vary greatly.

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 11.10 If a mutation occurs so that a                  mating type, will it still be able to reproduce?
      fungus is no longer able to produce a minus

Review Questions
   2. Meiosis usually produces ________ daughter                7. What phase of mitotic interphase is missing from
      cells.                                                       meiotic interkinesis?
        a. two haploid                                              a. G0 phase
        b. two diploid                                              b. G1 phase
        c. four haploid                                             c. S phase
        d. four diploid                                             d. G2 phase

   3. What structure is most important in forming the           8. The part of meiosis that is similar to mitosis is
      tetrads?                                                     ________.
        a. centromere                                                a. meiosis I
        b. synaptonemal complex                                      b. anaphase I
        c. chiasma                                                   c. meiosis II
        d. kinetochore                                               d. interkinesis

   4. At which stage of meiosis are sister chromatids           9. If a muscle cell of a typical organism has 32
      separated from each other?                                   chromosomes, how many chromosomes will be
        a. prophase I                                              in a gamete of that same organism?
        b. prophase II                                                a. 8
        c. anaphase I                                                 b. 16
        d. anaphase II                                                c. 32
                                                                      d. 64
   5. At metaphase I, homologous chromosomes are
      connected only at what structures?                      10. Which statement best describes the genetic
        a. chiasmata                                              content of the two daughter cells in prophase II
        b. recombination nodules                                  of meiosis?
        c. microtubules                                             a. haploid with one copy of each gene
        d. kinetochores                                             b. haploid with two copies of each gene
                                                                     c. diploid with two copies of each gene
   6. Which of the following is not true in regard to               d. diploid with four copies of each gene
      crossover?
        a. Spindle microtubules guide the transfer of         11. The pea plants used in Mendel’s genetic
           DNA across the synaptonemal complex.                   inheritance studies were diploid, with 14
        b. Nonsister chromatids exchange genetic                  chromosomes in somatic cells. Assuming no
           material.                                              crossing over events occur, how many unique
        c. Chiasmata are formed.                                  gametes could one pea plant produce?
        d. Recombination nodules mark the                           a. 28
           crossover point.                                         b. 128
                                                                    c. 196



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             11 • Critical Thinking Questions   311



       d. 16,384                                                b. haploid
                                                                c. alternation of generations
 12. How do telophase I and telophase II differ                 d. asexual
     during meiosis in animal cells?
       a. Cells remain diploid at the end of             16. A diploid, multicellular life-cycle stage that gives
           telophase I, but are haploid at the end of        rise to haploid cells by meiosis is called a
           telophase II.                                     ________.
       b. Daughter cells form a cell plate to divide            a. sporophyte
           during telophase I, but divide by                    b. gametophyte
           cytokinesis during telophase II.                     c. spore
       c. Cells enter interphase after telophase I,             d. gamete
           but not after telophase II.
       d. Chromosomes can remain condensed at            17. Hydras and jellyfish both live in a freshwater lake
           the end of telophase I, but decondense            that is slowly being acidified by the runoff from a
           after telophase II.                               chemical plant built upstream. Which population
                                                             is predicted to be better able to cope with the
 13. What is a likely evolutionary advantage of sexual       changing environment?
     reproduction over asexual reproduction?                    a. jellyfish
       a. Sexual reproduction involves fewer steps.             b. hydra
       b. There is a lower chance of using up the               c. The populations will be equally able to
          resources in a given environment.                         cope.
       c. Sexual reproduction results in variation in           d. Both populations will die.
          the offspring.
       d. Sexual reproduction is more cost-              18. Many farmers are worried about the decreasing
          effective.                                         genetic diversity of plants associated with
                                                             generations of artificial selection and inbreeding.
 14. Which type of life cycle has both a haploid and         Why is limiting random sexual reproduction of
     diploid multicellular stage?                            food crops concerning?
       a. asexual life cycles                                  a. Mutations during asexual reproduction
       b. most animal life cycles                                  decrease plant fitness.
       c. most fungal life cycles                              b. Consumers do not trust identical-
       d. alternation of generations                               appearing produce.
                                                               c. Larger portions of the plant populations
 15. What is the ploidy of the most conspicuous form               are susceptible to the same diseases.
     of most fungi?                                            d. Spores are not viable in an agricultural
       a. diploid                                                  setting.


Critical Thinking Questions
 19. Describe the process that results in the                 prevented the formation of recombination
     formation of a tetrad.                                   nodules be considered less fit than other
                                                              members of its species?
 20. Explain how the random alignment of
     homologous chromosomes during metaphase I           24. Does crossing over occur during prophase II?
     contributes to the variation in gametes produced        From an evolutionary perspective, why is this
     by meiosis.                                             advantageous?

 21. What is the function of the fused kinetochore       25. List and briefly describe the three processes that
     found on sister chromatids in prometaphase I?           lead to variation in offspring with the same
                                                             parents.
 22. In a comparison of the stages of meiosis to the
     stages of mitosis, which stages are unique to       26. Animals and plants both have diploid and
     meiosis and which stages have the same events           haploid cells. How does the animal life cycle
     in both meiosis and mitosis?                            differ from the alternation of generations
                                                             exhibited by plants?
 23. Why would an individual with a mutation that
312   11 • Critical Thinking Questions



  27. Explain why sexual reproduction is beneficial to       an alternation of generations life cycle?
      a population but can be detrimental to an
                                                         29. How do organisms with haploid-dominant life
      individual offspring.
                                                             cycles ensure continued genetic diversification
  28. How does the role of meiosis in gamete                 in offspring without using a meiotic process to
      production differ between organisms with a             make gametes?
      diploid-dominant life cycle and organisms with




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 12
Mendel's Experiments and Heredity




FIGURE 12.1 Experimenting with thousands of garden peas, Mendel uncovered the fundamentals of genetics.
(credit: modification of work by Jerry Kirkhart)


CHAPTER OUTLINE
12.1 Mendel’s Experiments and the Laws of Probability
12.2 Characteristics and Traits
12.3 Laws of Inheritance


INTRODUCTION Genetics is the study of heredity. Johann Gregor Mendel set the framework for
genetics long before chromosomes or genes had been identified, at a time when meiosis was not
well understood. Mendel selected a simple biological system and conducted methodical,
quantitative analyses using large sample sizes. Because of Mendel’s work, the fundamental
principles of heredity were revealed. We now know that genes, carried on chromosomes, are the
basic functional units of heredity with the capability to be replicated, expressed, or mutated.
Today, the postulates put forth by Mendel form the basis of classical, or Mendelian, genetics. Not
all traits are transmitted from parents to offspring according to Mendelian genetics, but Mendel’s
experiments serve as an excellent starting point for thinking about inheritance.

12.1 Mendel’s Experiments and the Laws of Probability
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Describe the scientific reasons for the success of Mendel’s experimental work
   • Describe the expected outcomes of monohybrid crosses involving dominant and recessive
      alleles
   • Apply the sum and product rules to calculate probabilities
314   12 • Mendel's Experiments and Heredity




                           FIGURE 12.2 Johann Gregor Mendel is considered the father of genetics.

      Johann Gregor Mendel (1822–1884) (Figure 12.2) was a lifelong learner, teacher, scientist, and
      man of faith. As a young adult, he joined the Augustinian Abbey of St. Thomas in Brno in what is
      now the Czech Republic. Supported by the monastery, he taught physics, botany, and natural
      science courses at the secondary and university levels. In 1856, he began a decade-long research
      pursuit involving inheritance patterns in honeybees and plants, ultimately settling on pea plants as
      his primary model system (a system with convenient characteristics used to study a specific
      biological phenomenon to be applied to other systems). In 1865, Mendel presented the results of
      his experiments with nearly 30,000 pea plants to the local Natural History Society. He
      demonstrated that traits are transmitted from parents to offspring independently of other traits
      and in dominant and recessive patterns. In 1866, he published his work, Experiments in Plant
                     1
      Hybridization, in the proceedings of the Natural History Society of Brünn.

      Mendel’s work went virtually unnoticed by the scientific community, which believed, incorrectly,
      that the process of inheritance involved a blending of parental traits that produced an
      intermediate physical appearance in offspring. The blending theory of inheritance asserted that
      the original parental traits were lost or absorbed by the blending in the offspring, but we now
      know that this is not the case. This hypothetical process appeared to be correct because of what
      we know now as continuous variation. Continuous variation results from the action of many
      genes to determine a characteristic like human height. Offspring appear to be a “blend” of their
      parents’ traits.

      Instead of continuous characteristics, Mendel worked with traits that were inherited in distinct
      classes (specifically, violet versus white flowers); this is referred to as discontinuous variation.
      Mendel’s choice of these kinds of traits allowed him to see experimentally that the traits were not
      blended in the offspring, nor were they absorbed, but rather that they kept their distinctness and
      could be passed on. In 1868, Mendel became abbot of the monastery and exchanged his scientific
      pursuits for his pastoral duties. He was not recognized for his extraordinary scientific contributions
      during his lifetime. In fact, it was not until 1900 that his work was rediscovered, reproduced, and
      revitalized by scientists on the brink of discovering the chromosomal basis of heredity.

      Mendel’s Model System
      Mendel’s seminal work was accomplished using the garden pea, Pisum sativum, to study

      1 Johann Gregor Mendel, Versuche über Pflanzenhybriden Verhandlungen des naturforschenden Vereines in Brünn,
      Bd. IV für das Jahr, 1865 Abhandlungen, 3–47. [for English translation see http://www.mendelweb.org/
      Mendel.plain.html (https://openstax.org/l/mendel_experiments)]



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    12.1 • Mendel’s Experiments and the Laws of Probability   315



inheritance. This species naturally self-fertilizes, such that pollen encounters ova within individual flowers. The
flower petals remain sealed tightly until after pollination, preventing pollination from other plants. The result is
highly inbred, or “true-breeding,” pea plants. These are plants that always produce offspring that look like the
parent. By experimenting with true-breeding pea plants, Mendel avoided the appearance of unexpected traits in
offspring that might occur if the plants were not true breeding. The garden pea also grows to maturity within one
season, meaning that several generations could be evaluated over a relatively short time. Finally, large quantities of
garden peas could be cultivated simultaneously, allowing Mendel to conclude that his results did not come about
simply by chance.

Mendelian Crosses
Mendel performed hybridizations, which involve mating two true-breeding individuals that have different traits. In
the pea, which is naturally self-pollinating, this is done by manually transferring pollen from the anther of a mature
pea plant of one variety to the stigma of a separate mature pea plant of the second variety. In plants, pollen carries
the male gametes (sperm) to the stigma, a sticky organ that traps pollen and allows the sperm to move down the
pistil to the female gametes (ova) below. To prevent the pea plant that was receiving pollen from self-fertilizing and
confounding his results, Mendel painstakingly removed all of the anthers from the plant’s flowers before they had a
chance to mature.

Plants used in first-generation crosses were called P0, or parental generation one (Figure 12.3). After each cross,
Mendel collected the seeds belonging to the P0 plants and grew them the following season. These offspring were
called the F1, or the first filial (filial = offspring, daughter or son) generation. Once Mendel examined the
characteristics in the F1 generation of plants, he allowed them to self-fertilize naturally. He then collected and grew
the seeds from the F1 plants to produce the F2, or second filial, generation. Mendel’s experiments extended beyond
the F2 generation to the F3 and F4 generations, and so on, but it was the ratio of characteristics in the P0−F1−F2
generations that were the most intriguing and became the basis for Mendel’s postulates.
316   12 • Mendel's Experiments and Heredity




      FIGURE 12.3 In one of his experiments on inheritance patterns, Mendel crossed plants that were true-breeding for violet flower color with
      plants true-breeding for white flower color (the P generation). The resulting hybrids in the F1 generation all had violet flowers. In the F2
      generation, approximately three quarters of the plants had violet flowers, and one quarter had white flowers.

      Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the Basics of Heredity
      In his 1865 publication, Mendel reported the results of his crosses involving seven different characteristics, each
      with two contrasting traits. A trait is defined as a variation in the physical appearance of a heritable characteristic.
      The characteristics included plant height, seed texture, seed color, flower color, pea pod size, pea pod color, and
      flower position. For the characteristic of flower color, for example, the two contrasting traits were white versus
      violet. To fully examine each characteristic, Mendel generated large numbers of F1 and F2 plants, reporting results
      from 19,959 F2 plants alone. His findings were consistent.

      What results did Mendel find in his crosses for flower color? First, Mendel confirmed that he had plants that bred
      true for white or violet flower color. Regardless of how many generations Mendel examined, all self-crossed
      offspring of parents with white flowers had white flowers, and all self-crossed offspring of parents with violet
      flowers had violet flowers. In addition, Mendel confirmed that, other than flower color, the pea plants were
      physically identical.


      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    12.1 • Mendel’s Experiments and the Laws of Probability   317



Once these validations were complete, Mendel applied the pollen from a plant with violet flowers to the stigma of a
plant with white flowers. After gathering and sowing the seeds that resulted from this cross, Mendel found that 100
percent of the F1 hybrid generation had violet flowers. Conventional wisdom at that time (the blending theory)
would have predicted the hybrid flowers to be pale violet or for hybrid plants to have equal numbers of white and
violet flowers. In other words, the contrasting parental traits were expected to blend in the offspring. Instead,
Mendel’s results demonstrated that the white flower trait in the F1 generation had completely disappeared.

Importantly, Mendel did not stop his experimentation there. He allowed the F1 plants to self-fertilize and found that,
of F2-generation plants, 705 had violet flowers and 224 had white flowers. This was a ratio of 3.15 violet flowers per
one white flower, or approximately 3:1. When Mendel transferred pollen from a plant with violet flowers to the
stigma of a plant with white flowers and vice versa, he obtained about the same ratio regardless of which parent,
male or female, contributed which trait. This is called a reciprocal cross—a paired cross in which the respective
traits of the male and female in one cross become the respective traits of the female and male in the other cross. For
the other six characteristics Mendel examined, the F1 and F2 generations behaved in the same way as they had for
flower color. One of the two traits would disappear completely from the F1 generation only to reappear in the F2
generation at a ratio of approximately 3:1 (Table 12.1).

                                 The Results of Mendel’s Garden Pea Hybridizations

    Characteristic     Contrasting P0 Traits      F1 Offspring Traits       F2 Offspring Traits       F2 Trait Ratios

                                                                                 705 violet
   Flower color       Violet vs. white           100 percent violet              224 white            3.15:1


                                                                                 651 axial
   Flower position    Axial vs. terminal         100 percent axial               207 terminal         3.14:1


                                                                                 787 tall
   Plant height       Tall vs. dwarf             100 percent tall                277 dwarf            2.84:1


                                                                                 5,474 round
   Seed texture       Round vs. wrinkled         100 percent round               1,850 wrinkled       2.96:1


                                                                                 6,022 yellow
   Seed color         Yellow vs. green           100 percent yellow              2,001 green          3.01:1


                                                                                 882 inflated
   Pea pod texture    Inflated vs. constricted   100 percent inflated            299 constricted      2.95:1


                                                                                 428 green
   Pea pod color      Green vs. yellow           100 percent green               152 yellow           2.82:1


 TABLE 12.1

Upon compiling his results for many thousands of plants, Mendel concluded that the characteristics could be
divided into expressed and latent traits. He called these, respectively, dominant and recessive traits. Dominant
traits are those that are inherited unchanged in a hybridization. Recessive traits become latent, or disappear, in the
offspring of a hybridization. The recessive trait does, however, reappear in the progeny of the hybrid offspring. An
example of a dominant trait is the violet-flower trait. For this same characteristic (flower color), white-colored
flowers are a recessive trait. The fact that the recessive trait reappeared in the F2 generation meant that the traits
remained separate (not blended) in the plants of the F1 generation. Mendel also proposed that plants possessed
318   12 • Mendel's Experiments and Heredity



      two copies of the trait for the flower-color characteristic, and that each parent transmitted one of its two copies to
      its offspring, where they came together. Moreover, the physical observation of a dominant trait could mean that the
      genetic composition of the organism included two dominant versions of the characteristic or that it included one
      dominant and one recessive version. Conversely, the observation of a recessive trait meant that the organism lacked
      any dominant versions of this characteristic.

      So why did Mendel repeatedly obtain 3:1 ratios in his crosses? To understand how Mendel deduced the basic
      mechanisms of inheritance that lead to such ratios, we must first review the laws of probability.

      Probability Basics
      Probabilities are mathematical measures of likelihood. The empirical probability of an event is calculated by dividing
      the number of times the event occurs by the total number of opportunities for the event to occur. It is also possible
      to calculate theoretical probabilities by dividing the number of times that an event is expected to occur by the
      number of times that it could occur. Empirical probabilities come from observations, like those of Mendel.
      Theoretical probabilities, on the other hand, come from knowing how the events are produced and assuming that
      the probabilities of individual outcomes are equal. A probability of one for some event indicates that it is guaranteed
      to occur, whereas a probability of zero indicates that it is guaranteed not to occur. An example of a genetic event is a
      round seed produced by a pea plant.

      In one experiment, Mendel demonstrated that the probability of the event “round seed” occurring was one in the F1
      offspring of true-breeding parents, one of which has round seeds and one of which has wrinkled seeds. When the F1
      plants were subsequently self-crossed, the probability of any given F2 offspring having round seeds was now three
      out of four. In other words, in a large population of F2 offspring chosen at random, 75 percent were expected to have
      round seeds, whereas 25 percent were expected to have wrinkled seeds. Using large numbers of crosses, Mendel
      was able to calculate probabilities and use these to predict the outcomes of other crosses.

      The Product Rule and Sum Rule
      Mendel demonstrated that pea plants transmit characteristics as discrete units from parent to offspring. As will be
      discussed, Mendel also determined that different characteristics, like seed color and seed texture, were transmitted
      independently of one another and could be considered in separate probability analyses. For instance, performing a
      cross between a plant with green, wrinkled seeds and a plant with yellow, round seeds still produced offspring that
      had a 3:1 ratio of yellow:green seeds (ignoring seed texture) and a 3:1 ratio of wrinkled:round seeds (ignoring seed
      color). The characteristics of color and texture did not influence each other.

      The product rule of probability can be applied to this phenomenon of the independent transmission of
      characteristics. The product rule states that the probability of two independent events occurring together can be
      calculated by multiplying the individual probabilities of each event occurring alone. To demonstrate the product rule,
      imagine that you are rolling a six-sided die (D) and flipping a penny (P) at the same time. The die may roll any
      number from 1–6 (D#), whereas the penny may turn up heads (PH) or tails (PT). The outcome of rolling the die has
      no effect on the outcome of flipping the penny and vice versa. There are 12 possible outcomes of this action (Table
      12.2), and each event is expected to occur with equal probability.

                                Twelve Equally Likely Outcomes of Rolling a Die and Flipping a Penny

                                        Rolling Die                       Flipping Penny

                                               D1                                PH

                                               D1                                PT

                                               D2                                PH

                                               D2                                PT
                              TABLE 12.2




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     12.1 • Mendel’s Experiments and the Laws of Probability   319




                                 Rolling Die                         Flipping Penny

                                      D3                                   PH

                                      D3                                    PT

                                      D4                                   PH

                                      D4                                    PT

                                      D5                                   PH

                                      D5                                    PT

                                      D6                                   PH

                                      D6                                    PT

                       TABLE 12.2

Of the 12 possible outcomes, the die has a 2/12 (or 1/6) probability of rolling a two, and the penny has a 6/12 (or 1/
2) probability of coming up heads. By the product rule, the probability that you will obtain the combined outcome 2
and heads is: (D2) x (PH) = (1/6) x (1/2) or 1/12 (Table 12.3). Notice the word “and” in the description of the
probability. The “and” is a signal to apply the product rule. For example, consider how the product rule is applied to
the dihybrid cross: the probability of having both dominant traits (for example, yellow and round) in the F2 progeny
is the product of the probabilities of having the dominant trait for each characteristic, as shown here:

                                                                 ​
On the other hand, the sum rule of probability is applied when considering two mutually exclusive outcomes that
can come about by more than one pathway. The sum rule states that the probability of the occurrence of one event
or the other event, of two mutually exclusive events, is the sum of their individual probabilities. Notice the word “or”
in the description of the probability. The “or” indicates that you should apply the sum rule. In this case, let’s imagine
you are flipping a penny (P) and a quarter (Q). What is the probability of one coin coming up heads and one coin
coming up tails? This outcome can be achieved by two cases: the penny may be heads (PH) and the quarter may be
tails (QT), or the quarter may be heads (QH) and the penny may be tails (PT). Either case fulfills the outcome. By the
sum rule, we calculate the probability of obtaining one head and one tail as [(PH) × (QT)] + [(QH) × (PT)] = [(1/2) × (1/
2)] + [(1/2) × (1/2)] = 1/2 (Table 12.3). You should also notice that we used the product rule to calculate the
probability of PH and QT, and also the probability of PT and QH, before we summed them. Again, the sum rule can be
applied to show the probability of having exactly one dominant trait in the F2 generation of a dihybrid cross:




                                            The Product Rule and Sum Rule

                      Product Rule                                                   Sum Rule

 For independent events A and B, the probability (P) of     For mutually exclusive events A and B, the probability
 them both occurring (A and B) is (PA × PB)                 (P) that at least one occurs (A or B) is (PA + PB)

TABLE 12.3

To use probability laws in practice, we must work with large sample sizes because small sample sizes are prone to
deviations caused by chance. The large quantities of pea plants that Mendel examined allowed him to calculate the
probabilities of the traits appearing in his F2 generation. As you will learn, this discovery meant that when parental
320   12 • Mendel's Experiments and Heredity



      traits were known, the offspring’s traits could be predicted accurately even before fertilization.

      12.2 Characteristics and Traits
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Explain the relationship between genotypes and phenotypes in dominant and recessive gene systems
         • Develop a Punnett square to calculate the expected proportions of genotypes and phenotypes in a
            monohybrid cross
         • Explain the purpose and methods of a test cross
         • Identify non-Mendelian inheritance patterns such as incomplete dominance, codominance, recessive
            lethals, multiple alleles, and sex linkage

      Physical characteristics are expressed through genes carried on chromosomes. The genetic makeup of peas
      consists of two similar, or homologous, copies of each chromosome, one from each parent. Each pair of homologous
      chromosomes has the same linear order of genes. In other words, peas are diploid organisms in that they have two
      copies of each chromosome. The same is true for many other plants and for virtually all animals. Diploid organisms
      produce haploid gametes, which contain one copy of each homologous chromosome that unite at fertilization to
      create a diploid zygote.

      For cases in which a single gene controls a single characteristic, a diploid organism has two genetic copies that may
      or may not encode the same version of that characteristic. Gene variants that arise by mutation and exist at the
      same relative locations on homologous chromosomes are called alleles. Mendel examined the inheritance of genes
      with just two allele forms, but it is common to encounter more than two alleles for any given gene in a natural
      population.

      Phenotypes and Genotypes
      Two alleles for a given gene in a diploid organism are expressed and interact to produce physical characteristics. The
      observable traits expressed by an organism are referred to as its phenotype. An organism’s underlying genetic
      makeup, consisting of both physically visible and non-expressed alleles, is called its genotype. Mendel’s
      hybridization experiments demonstrate the difference between phenotype and genotype. When true-breeding
      plants in which one parent had yellow pods and one had green pods were cross-fertilized, all of the F1 hybrid
      offspring had yellow pods. That is, the hybrid offspring were phenotypically identical to the true-breeding parent
      with yellow pods. However, we know that the allele donated by the parent with green pods was not simply lost
      because it reappeared in some of the F2 offspring. Therefore, the F1 plants must have been genotypically different
      from the parent with yellow pods.

      The P1 plants that Mendel used in his experiments were each homozygous for the trait he was studying. Diploid
      organisms that are homozygous at a given gene, or locus, have two identical alleles for that gene on their
      homologous chromosomes. Mendel’s parental pea plants always bred true because both of the gametes produced
      carried the same trait. When P1 plants with contrasting traits were cross-fertilized, all of the offspring were
      heterozygous for the contrasting trait, meaning that their genotype reflected that they had different alleles for the
      gene being examined.

      Dominant and Recessive Alleles
      Our discussion of homozygous and heterozygous organisms brings us to why the F1 heterozygous offspring were
      identical to one of the parents, rather than expressing both alleles. In all seven pea-plant characteristics, one of the
      two contrasting alleles was dominant, and the other was recessive. Mendel called the dominant allele the expressed
      unit factor; the recessive allele was referred to as the latent unit factor. We now know that these so-called unit
      factors are actually genes on homologous chromosome pairs. For a gene that is expressed in a dominant and
      recessive pattern, homozygous dominant and heterozygous organisms will look identical (that is, they will have
      different genotypes but the same phenotype). The traits of the recessive allele will only be observed in homozygous
      recessive individuals (Table 12.4).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           12.2 • Characteristics and Traits   321




                               Human Inheritance in Dominant and Recessive Patterns

                                 Dominant Traits                Recessive Traits

                               Achondroplasia            Albinism

                               Brachydactyly             Cystic fibrosis

                               Huntington’s disease      Duchenne muscular dystrophy

                               Marfan syndrome           Galactosemia

                               Neurofibromatosis         Phenylketonuria

                               Widow’s peak              Sickle-cell anemia

                               Wooly hair                Tay-Sachs disease

                             TABLE 12.4

Several conventions exist for referring to genes and alleles. For the purposes of this chapter, we will abbreviate
genes using the first letter of the gene’s corresponding dominant trait. For example, violet is the dominant trait for a
pea plant’s flower color, so the flower-color gene would be abbreviated as V (note that it is customary to italicize
gene designations). Furthermore, we will use uppercase and lowercase letters to represent dominant and recessive
alleles, respectively. Therefore, we would refer to the genotype of a homozygous dominant pea plant with violet
flowers as VV, a homozygous recessive pea plant with white flowers as vv, and a heterozygous pea plant with violet
flowers as Vv.

The Punnett Square Approach for a Monohybrid Cross
When fertilization occurs between two true-breeding parents that differ in only one characteristic, the process is
called a monohybrid cross, and the resulting offspring are monohybrids. Mendel performed seven monohybrid
crosses involving contrasting traits for each characteristic. On the basis of his results in F1 and F2 generations,
Mendel postulated that each parent in the monohybrid cross contributed one of two paired unit factors to each
offspring, and every possible combination of unit factors was equally likely.

To demonstrate a monohybrid cross, consider the case of true-breeding pea plants with yellow versus green pea
seeds. The dominant seed color is yellow; therefore, the parental genotypes were YY for the plants with yellow
seeds and yy for the plants with green seeds, respectively. A Punnett square, devised by the British geneticist
Reginald Punnett, can be drawn that applies the rules of probability to predict the possible outcomes of a genetic
cross or mating and their expected frequencies. To prepare a Punnett square, all possible combinations of the
parental alleles are listed along the top (for one parent) and side (for the other parent) of a grid, representing their
meiotic segregation into haploid gametes. Then the combinations of egg and sperm are made in the boxes in the
table to show which alleles are combining. Each box then represents the diploid genotype of a zygote, or fertilized
egg, that could result from this mating. Because each possibility is equally likely, genotypic ratios can be determined
from a Punnett square. If the pattern of inheritance (dominant or recessive) is known, the phenotypic ratios can be
inferred as well. For a monohybrid cross of two true-breeding parents, each parent contributes one type of allele. In
this case, only one genotype is possible. All offspring are Yy and have yellow seeds (Figure 12.4).
322   12 • Mendel's Experiments and Heredity




      FIGURE 12.4 In the P generation, pea plants that are true-breeding for the dominant yellow phenotype are crossed with plants with the
      recessive green phenotype. This cross produces F1 heterozygotes with a yellow phenotype. Punnett square analysis can be used to predict
      the genotypes of the F2 generation.

      A self-cross of one of the Yy heterozygous offspring can be represented in a 2 × 2 Punnett square because each
      parent can donate one of two different alleles. Therefore, the offspring can potentially have one of four allele
      combinations: YY, Yy, yY, or yy (Figure 12.4). Notice that there are two ways to obtain the Yy genotype: a Y from the
      egg and a y from the sperm, or a y from the egg and a Y from the sperm. Both of these possibilities must be counted.
      Recall that Mendel’s pea-plant characteristics behaved in the same way in reciprocal crosses. Therefore, the two
      possible heterozygous combinations produce offspring that are genotypically and phenotypically identical despite
      their dominant and recessive alleles deriving from different parents. They are grouped together. Because
      fertilization is a random event, we expect each combination to be equally likely and for the offspring to exhibit a ratio
      of YY:Yy:yy genotypes of 1:2:1 (Figure 12.4). Furthermore, because the YY and Yy offspring have yellow seeds and
      are phenotypically identical, applying the sum rule of probability, we expect the offspring to exhibit a phenotypic
      ratio of 3 yellow:1 green. Indeed, working with large sample sizes, Mendel observed approximately this ratio in
      every F2 generation resulting from crosses for individual traits.

      Mendel validated these results by performing an F3 cross in which he self-crossed the dominant- and recessive-
      expressing F2 plants. When he self-crossed the plants expressing green seeds, all of the offspring had green seeds,
      confirming that all green seeds had homozygous genotypes of yy. When he self-crossed the F2 plants expressing
      yellow seeds, he found that one-third of the plants bred true, and two-thirds of the plants segregated at a 3:1 ratio
      of yellow:green seeds. In this case, the true-breeding plants had homozygous (YY) genotypes, whereas the
      segregating plants corresponded to the heterozygous (Yy) genotype. When these plants self-fertilized, the outcome
      was just like the F1 self-fertilizing cross.

      The Test Cross Distinguishes the Dominant Phenotype
      Beyond predicting the offspring of a cross between known homozygous or heterozygous parents, Mendel also



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     12.2 • Characteristics and Traits   323



developed a way to determine whether an organism that expressed a dominant trait was a heterozygote or a
homozygote. Called the test cross, this technique is still used by plant and animal breeders. In a test cross, the
dominant-expressing organism is crossed with an organism that is homozygous recessive for the same
characteristic. If the dominant-expressing organism is a homozygote, then all F1 offspring will be heterozygotes
expressing the dominant trait (Figure 12.5). Alternatively, if the dominant expressing organism is a heterozygote, the
F1 offspring will exhibit a 1:1 ratio of heterozygotes and recessive homozygotes (Figure 12.5). The test cross further
validates Mendel’s postulate that pairs of unit factors segregate equally.



        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 12.5 A test cross can be performed to determine whether an organism expressing a dominant trait is a homozygote or a
heterozygote.

In pea plants, round peas (R) are dominant to wrinkled peas (r). You do a test cross between a pea plant with
wrinkled peas (genotype rr) and a plant of unknown genotype that has round peas. You end up with three plants, all
which have round peas. From this data, can you tell if the round pea parent plant is homozygous dominant or
heterozygous? If the round pea parent plant is heterozygous, what is the probability that a random sample of 3
progeny peas will all be round?


Many human diseases are genetically inherited. A healthy person in a family in which some members suffer from a
recessive genetic disorder may want to know if they have the disease-causing gene and what risk exists of passing
the disorder on to their offspring. Of course, doing a test cross in humans is unethical and impractical. Instead,
geneticists use pedigree analysis to study the inheritance pattern of human genetic diseases (Figure 12.6).
324   12 • Mendel's Experiments and Heredity




              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 12.6 Alkaptonuria is a recessive genetic disorder in which two amino acids, phenylalanine and tyrosine, are not properly
      metabolized. Affected individuals may have darkened skin and brown urine, and may suffer joint damage and other complications. In this
      pedigree, individuals with the disorder are indicated in blue and have the genotype aa. Unaffected individuals are indicated in yellow and
      have the genotype AA or Aa. Note that it is often possible to determine a person’s genotype from the genotype of their offspring. For
      example, if neither parent has the disorder but their child does, they must be heterozygous. Two individuals on the pedigree have an
      unaffected phenotype but unknown genotype. Because they do not have the disorder, they must have at least one normal allele, so their
      genotype gets the “A?” designation.

      What are the genotypes of the individuals labeled 1, 2, and 3?


      Alternatives to Dominance and Recessiveness
      Mendel’s experiments with pea plants suggested that: (1) two “units” or alleles exist for every gene; (2) alleles
      maintain their integrity in each generation (no blending); and (3) in the presence of the dominant allele, the
      recessive allele is hidden and makes no contribution to the phenotype. Therefore, recessive alleles can be “carried”
      and not expressed by individuals. Such heterozygous individuals are sometimes referred to as “carriers.” Further
      genetic studies in other plants and animals have shown that much more complexity exists, but that the fundamental
      principles of Mendelian genetics still hold true. In the sections to follow, we consider some of the extensions of
      Mendelism. If Mendel had chosen an experimental system that exhibited these genetic complexities, it’s possible
      that he would not have understood what his results meant.

      Incomplete Dominance
      Mendel’s results, that traits are inherited as dominant and recessive pairs, contradicted the view at that time that
      offspring exhibited a blend of their parents’ traits. However, the heterozygote phenotype occasionally does appear
      to be intermediate between the two parents. For example, in the snapdragon, Antirrhinum majus (Figure 12.7), a
      cross between a homozygous parent with white flowers (CWCW) and a homozygous parent with red flowers (CRCR)
      will produce offspring with pink flowers (CRCW). (Note that different genotypic abbreviations are used for Mendelian
      extensions to distinguish these patterns from simple dominance and recessiveness.) This pattern of inheritance is
      described as incomplete dominance, denoting the expression of two contrasting alleles such that the individual
      displays an intermediate phenotype. The allele for red flowers is incompletely dominant over the allele for white
      flowers. However, the results of a heterozygote self-cross can still be predicted, just as with Mendelian dominant
      and recessive crosses. In this case, the genotypic ratio would be 1 CRCR:2 CRCW:1 CWCW, and the phenotypic ratio
      would be 1:2:1 for red:pink:white.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    12.2 • Characteristics and Traits   325




  FIGURE 12.7 These pink flowers of a heterozygote snapdragon result from incomplete dominance. (credit: “storebukkebruse”/Flickr)

Codominance
A variation on incomplete dominance is codominance, in which both alleles for the same characteristic are
simultaneously expressed in the heterozygote. An example of codominance is the MN blood groups of humans. The
M and N alleles are expressed in the form of an M or N antigen present on the surface of red blood cells.
Homozygotes (LMLM and LNLN) express either the M or the N allele, and heterozygotes (LMLN) express both alleles
equally. In a self-cross between heterozygotes expressing a codominant trait, the three possible offspring
genotypes are phenotypically distinct. However, the 1:2:1 genotypic ratio characteristic of a Mendelian monohybrid
cross still applies.

Multiple Alleles
Mendel implied that only two alleles, one dominant and one recessive, could exist for a given gene. We now know
that this is an oversimplification. Although individual humans (and all diploid organisms) can only have two alleles
for a given gene, multiple alleles may exist at the population level such that many combinations of two alleles are
observed. Note that when many alleles exist for the same gene, the convention is to denote the most common
phenotype or genotype among wild animals as the wild type (often abbreviated “+”); this is considered the
standard or norm. All other phenotypes or genotypes are considered variants of this standard, meaning that they
deviate from the wild type. The variant may be recessive or dominant to the wild-type allele.

An example of multiple alleles is coat color in rabbits (Figure 12.8). Here, four alleles exist for the c gene. The wild-
type version, C+C+, is expressed as brown fur. The chinchilla phenotype, cchcch, is expressed as black-tipped white
fur. The Himalayan phenotype, chch, has black fur on the extremities and white fur elsewhere. Finally, the albino, or
“colorless” phenotype, cc, is expressed as white fur. In cases of multiple alleles, dominance hierarchies can exist. In
this case, the wild-type allele is dominant over all the others, chinchilla is incompletely dominant over Himalayan
and albino, and Himalayan is dominant over albino. This hierarchy, or allelic series, was revealed by observing the
phenotypes of each possible heterozygote offspring.
326   12 • Mendel's Experiments and Heredity




                                      FIGURE 12.8 Four different alleles exist for the rabbit coat color (C) gene.

      The complete dominance of a wild-type phenotype over all other mutants often occurs as an effect of “dosage” of a
      specific gene product, such that the wild-type allele supplies the correct amount of gene product whereas the
      mutant alleles cannot. For the allelic series in rabbits, the wild-type allele may supply a given dosage of fur pigment,
      whereas the mutants supply a lesser dosage or none at all. Interestingly, the Himalayan phenotype is the result of
      an allele that produces a temperature-sensitive gene product that only produces pigment in the cooler extremities
      of the rabbit’s body.

      Alternatively, one mutant allele can be dominant over all other phenotypes, including the wild type. This may occur
      when the mutant allele somehow interferes with the genetic message so that even a heterozygote with one wild-
      type allele copy expresses the mutant phenotype. One way in which the mutant allele can interfere is by enhancing
      the function of the wild-type gene product or changing its distribution in the body. One example of this is the
      Antennapedia mutation in Drosophila (Figure 12.9). In this case, the mutant allele expands the distribution of the
      gene product, and as a result, the Antennapedia heterozygote develops legs on its head where its antennae should
      be.




      FIGURE 12.9 As seen in comparing the wild-type Drosophila (left) and the Antennapedia mutant (right), the Antennapedia mutant has legs
      on its head in place of antennae.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         12.2 • Characteristics and Traits    327




        EVOLUTION CONNECTION

Multiple Alleles Confer Drug Resistance in the Malaria Parasite
Malaria is a parasitic disease in humans that is transmitted by infected female mosquitoes, including Anopheles
gambiae (Figure 12.10a), and is characterized by cyclic high fevers, chills, flu-like symptoms, and severe anemia.
Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax are the most common causative agents of malaria, and P. falciparum is the
most deadly (Figure 12.10b). When promptly and correctly treated, P. falciparum malaria has a mortality rate of 0.1
percent. However, in some parts of the world, the parasite has evolved resistance to commonly used malaria
treatments, so the most effective malarial treatments can vary by geographic region.




FIGURE 12.10 The (a) Anopheles gambiae, or African malaria mosquito, acts as a vector in the transmission to humans of the malaria-
causing parasite (b) Plasmodium falciparum, here visualized using false-color transmission electron microscopy. (credit a: James D.
Gathany; credit b: Ute Frevert; false color by Margaret Shear; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

In Southeast Asia, Africa, and South America, P. falciparum has developed resistance to the anti-malarial drugs
chloroquine, mefloquine, and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine. P. falciparum, which is haploid during the life stage in
which it is infectious to humans, has evolved multiple drug-resistant mutant alleles of the dhps gene. Varying
degrees of sulfadoxine resistance are associated with each of these alleles. Being haploid, P. falciparum needs only
one drug-resistant allele to express this trait.

In Southeast Asia, different sulfadoxine-resistant alleles of the dhps gene are localized to different geographic
regions. This is a common evolutionary phenomenon that occurs because drug-resistant mutants arise in a
population and interbreed with other P. falciparum isolates in close proximity. Sulfadoxine-resistant parasites cause
considerable human hardship in regions where this drug is widely used as an over-the-counter malaria remedy. As is
common with pathogens that multiply to large numbers within an infection cycle, P. falciparum evolves relatively
rapidly (over a decade or so) in response to the selective pressure of commonly used anti-malarial drugs. For this
reason, scientists must constantly work to develop new drugs or drug combinations to combat the worldwide
                 2
malaria burden.


X-Linked Traits
In humans, as well as in many other animals and some plants, the sex of the individual is determined by sex
chromosomes. The sex chromosomes are one pair of non-homologous chromosomes. Until now, we have only
considered inheritance patterns among non-sex chromosomes, or autosomes. In addition to 22 homologous pairs
of autosomes, human females have a homologous pair of X chromosomes, whereas human males have an XY
chromosome pair. Although the Y chromosome contains a small region of similarity to the X chromosome so that
they can pair during meiosis, the Y chromosome is much shorter and contains many fewer genes. In fact, when
Nettie Stevens discovered that the X and Y chromosomes were the determinants of sex, she differentiated them
only by size. (Note that in this case and in the description below, the terms X and Y chromosome were not used at
the time.) When a gene being examined is present on the X chromosome, but not on the Y chromosome, it is said to
be X-linked.

Eye color in Drosophila was one of the first X-linked traits to be identified. Thomas Hunt Morgan mapped this trait to
what became known as the X chromosome in 1910. Like humans, Drosophila males have an XY chromosome pair,
and females are XX. In flies, the wild-type eye color is red (XW) and it is dominant to white eye color (Xw) (Figure
12.11). Because of the location of the eye-color gene, reciprocal crosses do not produce the same offspring ratios.

2 Sumiti Vinayak, et al., “Origin and Evolution of Sulfadoxine Resistant Plasmodium falciparum,” Public Library of Science Pathogens 6, no.
3 (2010): e1000830, doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000830.
328   12 • Mendel's Experiments and Heredity



      Males are said to be hemizygous, because they have only one allele for any X-linked characteristic. Hemizygosity
      makes the descriptions of dominance and recessiveness irrelevant for XY males. Drosophila males lack a second
      allele copy on the Y chromosome; that is, their genotype can only be XWY or XwY. In contrast, females have two
      allele copies of this gene and can be XWXW, XWXw, or XwXw.




      FIGURE 12.11 In Drosophila, several genes determine eye color. The genes for white and vermilion eye colors are located on the X
      chromosome. Others are located on the autosomes. Clockwise from top left are brown, cinnabar, sepia, vermilion, white, and red. Red eye
      color is wild-type and is dominant to white eye color.

      In an X-linked cross, the genotypes of F1 and F2 offspring depend on whether the recessive trait was expressed by
      the male or the female in the P1 generation. With regard to Drosophila eye color, when the P1 male expresses the
      white-eye phenotype and the female is homozygous red-eyed, all members of the F1 generation exhibit red eyes
      (Figure 12.12). The F1 females are heterozygous (XWXw), and the males are all XWY, having received their X
      chromosome from the homozygous dominant P1 female and their Y chromosome from the P1 male. A subsequent
      cross between the XWXw female and the XWY male would produce only red-eyed females (with XWXW or XWXw
      genotypes) and both red- and white-eyed males (with XWY or XwY genotypes). Now, consider a cross between a
      homozygous white-eyed female and a male with red eyes. The F1 generation would exhibit only heterozygous red-
      eyed females (XWXw) and only white-eyed males (XwY). Half of the F2 females would be red-eyed (XWXw) and half
      would be white-eyed (XwXw). Similarly, half of the F2 males would be red-eyed (XWY) and half would be white-eyed
      (XwY).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        12.2 • Characteristics and Traits   329




        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 12.12 Punnett square analysis is used to determine the ratio of offspring from a cross between a red-eyed male fruit fly and a
white-eyed female fruit fly.

What ratio of offspring would result from a cross between a white-eyed male and a female that is heterozygous for
red eye color?


Discoveries in fruit fly genetics can be applied to human genetics. When a female parent is homozygous for a
recessive X-linked trait, she will pass the trait on to 100 percent of her offspring. Her male offspring are, therefore,
destined to express the trait, as they will inherit their father's Y chromosome. In humans, the alleles for certain
conditions (some forms of color blindness, hemophilia, and muscular dystrophy) are X-linked. Females who are
heterozygous for these diseases are said to be carriers and may not exhibit any phenotypic effects. These females
will pass the disease to half of their sons and will pass carrier status to half of their daughters; therefore, recessive
X-linked traits appear more frequently in males than females.

In some groups of organisms with sex chromosomes, the sex with the non-homologous sex chromosomes is the
female rather than the male. This is the case for all birds. In this case, sex-linked traits will be more likely to appear
in the female, in which they are hemizygous.

Human Sex-linked Disorders
Sex-linkage studies in Morgan’s laboratory provided the fundamentals for understanding X-linked recessive
disorders in humans, which include red-green color blindness, and Types A and B hemophilia. Because human
males need to inherit only one recessive mutant X allele to be affected, X-linked disorders are disproportionately
observed in males. Females must inherit recessive X-linked alleles from both of their parents in order to express the
trait. When they inherit one recessive X-linked mutant allele and one dominant X-linked wild-type allele, they are
carriers of the trait and are typically unaffected. Carrier females can manifest mild forms of the trait due to the
inactivation of the dominant allele located on one of the X chromosomes. However, female carriers can contribute
the trait to their male children, resulting in the male exhibiting the trait, or they can contribute the recessive allele to
their female children, resulting in the children being carriers of the trait (Figure 12.13). Although some Y-linked
330   12 • Mendel's Experiments and Heredity



      recessive disorders exist, typically they are associated with infertility in males and are therefore not transmitted to
      subsequent generations.




      FIGURE 12.13 The male offspring of a person who is a carrier of a recessive X-linked disorder will have a 50 percent chance of being
      affected. A female will not be affected, but she will have a 50 percent chance of being a carrier like the female parent.


           LINK TO LEARNING
      Watch this video to learn more about sex-linked traits.

      Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/12-2-characteristics-and-traits)


      Lethality
      A large proportion of genes in an individual’s genome are essential for survival. Occasionally, a nonfunctional allele
      for an essential gene can arise by mutation and be transmitted in a population as long as individuals with this allele
      also have a wild-type, functional copy. The wild-type allele functions at a capacity sufficient to sustain life and is
      therefore considered to be dominant over the nonfunctional allele. However, consider two heterozygous parents
      that have a genotype of wild-type/nonfunctional mutant for a hypothetical essential gene. In one quarter of their
      offspring, we would expect to observe individuals that are homozygous recessive for the nonfunctional allele.
      Because the gene is essential, these individuals might fail to develop past fertilization, die in utero, or die later in
      life, depending on what life stage requires this gene. An inheritance pattern in which an allele is only lethal in the
      homozygous form and in which the heterozygote may be normal or have some altered nonlethal phenotype is
      referred to as recessive lethal.

      For crosses between heterozygous individuals with a recessive lethal allele that causes death before birth when
      homozygous, only wild-type homozygotes and heterozygotes would be observed. The genotypic ratio would
      therefore be 2:1. In other instances, the recessive lethal allele might also exhibit a dominant (but not lethal)
      phenotype in the heterozygote. For instance, the recessive lethal Curly allele in Drosophila affects wing shape in the
      heterozygote form but is lethal in the homozygote.

      A single copy of the wild-type allele is not always sufficient for normal functioning or even survival. The dominant
      lethal inheritance pattern is one in which an allele is lethal both in the homozygote and the heterozygote; this allele
      can only be transmitted if the lethality phenotype occurs after reproductive age. Individuals with mutations that



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               12.3 • Laws of Inheritance    331



result in dominant lethal alleles fail to survive even in the heterozygote form. Dominant lethal alleles are very rare
because, as you might expect, the allele only lasts one generation and is not transmitted. However, just as the
recessive lethal allele might not immediately manifest the phenotype of death, dominant lethal alleles also might
not be expressed until adulthood. Once the individual reaches reproductive age, the allele may be unknowingly
passed on, resulting in a delayed death in both generations. An example of this in humans is Huntington’s disease, in
which the nervous system gradually wastes away (Figure 12.14). People who are heterozygous for the dominant
Huntington allele (Hh) will inevitably develop the fatal disease. However, the onset of Huntington’s disease may not
occur until age 40, at which point the afflicted persons may have already passed the allele to 50 percent of their
offspring.




FIGURE 12.14 The neuron in the center of this micrograph (yellow) has nuclear inclusions characteristic of Huntington’s disease (orange
area in the center of the neuron). Huntington’s disease occurs when an abnormal dominant allele for the Huntington gene is present.
(credit: Dr. Steven Finkbeiner, Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, The Taube-Koret Center for Huntington's Disease Research, and
the University of California San Francisco/Wikimedia)

12.3 Laws of Inheritance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Explain Mendel’s law of segregation and independent assortment in terms of genetics and the events of
      meiosis
   • Use the forked-line method and the probability rules to calculate the probability of genotypes and
      phenotypes from multiple gene crosses
   • Explain the effect of linkage and recombination on gamete genotypes
   • Explain the phenotypic outcomes of epistatic effects between genes

Mendel generalized the results of his pea-plant experiments into four postulates, some of which are sometimes
called “laws,” that describe the basis of dominant and recessive inheritance in diploid organisms. As you have
learned, more complex extensions of Mendelism exist that do not exhibit the same F2 phenotypic ratios (3:1).
Nevertheless, these laws summarize the basics of classical genetics.

Pairs of Unit Factors, or Genes
Mendel proposed first that paired unit factors of heredity were transmitted faithfully from generation to generation
by the dissociation and reassociation of paired factors during gametogenesis and fertilization, respectively. After he
332   12 • Mendel's Experiments and Heredity



      crossed peas with contrasting traits and found that the recessive trait resurfaced in the F2 generation, Mendel
      deduced that hereditary factors must be inherited as discrete units. This finding contradicted the belief at that time
      that parental traits were blended in the offspring.

      Alleles Can Be Dominant or Recessive
      Mendel’s law of dominance states that in a heterozygote, one trait will conceal the presence of another trait for the
      same characteristic. Rather than both alleles contributing to a phenotype, the dominant allele will be expressed
      exclusively. The recessive allele will remain “latent” but will be transmitted to offspring by the same manner in
      which the dominant allele is transmitted. The recessive trait will only be expressed by offspring that have two copies
      of this allele (Figure 12.15), and these offspring will breed true when self-crossed.

      Since Mendel’s experiments with pea plants, researchers have found that the law of dominance does not always
      hold true. Instead, several different patterns of inheritance have been found to exist.




                                    FIGURE 12.15 The child in the photo expresses albinism, a recessive trait.

      Equal Segregation of Alleles
      Observing that true-breeding pea plants with contrasting traits gave rise to F1 generations that all expressed the
      dominant trait and F2 generations that expressed the dominant and recessive traits in a 3:1 ratio, Mendel proposed
      the law of segregation. This law states that paired unit factors (genes) must segregate equally into gametes such
      that offspring have an equal likelihood of inheriting either factor. For the F2 generation of a monohybrid cross, the
      following three possible combinations of genotypes could result: homozygous dominant, heterozygous, or
      homozygous recessive. Because heterozygotes could arise from two different pathways (receiving one dominant and
      one recessive allele from either parent), and because heterozygotes and homozygous dominant individuals are
      phenotypically identical, the law supports Mendel’s observed 3:1 phenotypic ratio. The equal segregation of alleles
      is the reason we can apply the Punnett square to accurately predict the offspring of parents with known genotypes.
      The physical basis of Mendel’s law of segregation is the first division of meiosis, in which the homologous
      chromosomes with their different versions of each gene are segregated into daughter nuclei. The role of the meiotic
      segregation of chromosomes in sexual reproduction was not understood by the scientific community during
      Mendel’s lifetime.

      Independent Assortment
      Mendel’s law of independent assortment states that genes do not influence each other with regard to the sorting of
      alleles into gametes, and every possible combination of alleles for every gene is equally likely to occur. The
      independent assortment of genes can be illustrated by the dihybrid cross, a cross between two true-breeding




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           12.3 • Laws of Inheritance   333



parents that express different traits for two characteristics. Consider the characteristics of seed color and seed
texture for two pea plants, one that has green, wrinkled seeds (yyrr) and another that has yellow, round seeds
(YYRR). Because each parent is homozygous, the law of segregation indicates that the gametes for the green/
wrinkled plant all are yr, and the gametes for the yellow/round plant are all YR. Therefore, the F1 generation of
offspring all are YyRr (Figure 12.16).



       VISUAL CONNECTION




                   FIGURE 12.16 This dihybrid cross of pea plants involves the genes for seed color and texture.

In pea plants, round seed shape (R) is dominant to wrinkled seed shape (r) and yellow peas (Y) are dominant to
green peas (y). What are the possible genotypes and phenotypes for a cross between RrYY and rrYy pea plants? How
many squares do you need to do a Punnett square analysis of this cross?


For the F2 generation, the law of segregation requires that each gamete receive either an R allele or an r allele along
with either a Y allele or a y allele. The law of independent assortment states that a gamete into which an r allele
sorted would be equally likely to contain either a Y allele or a y allele. Thus, there are four equally likely gametes
that can be formed when the YyRr heterozygote is self-crossed, as follows: YR, Yr, yR, and yr. Arranging these
gametes along the top and left of a 4 × 4 Punnett square (Figure 12.16) gives us 16 equally likely genotypic
combinations. From these genotypes, we infer a phenotypic ratio of 9 round/yellow:3 round/green:3 wrinkled/
yellow:1 wrinkled/green (Figure 12.16). These are the offspring ratios we would expect, assuming we performed the
crosses with a large enough sample size.

Because of independent assortment and dominance, the 9:3:3:1 dihybrid phenotypic ratio can be collapsed into two
3:1 ratios, characteristic of any monohybrid cross that follows a dominant and recessive pattern. Ignoring seed color
and considering only seed texture in the above dihybrid cross, we would expect that three quarters of the F2
generation offspring would be round, and one quarter would be wrinkled. Similarly, isolating only seed color, we
would assume that three quarters of the F2 offspring would be yellow and one quarter would be green. The sorting
of alleles for texture and color are independent events, so we can apply the product rule. Therefore, the proportion
of round and yellow F2 offspring is expected to be (3/4) × (3/4) = 9/16, and the proportion of wrinkled and green
offspring is expected to be (1/4) × (1/4) = 1/16. These proportions are identical to those obtained using a Punnett
square. Round, green and wrinkled, yellow offspring can also be calculated using the product rule, as each of these
genotypes includes one dominant and one recessive phenotype. Therefore, the proportion of each is calculated as
334   12 • Mendel's Experiments and Heredity



      (3/4) × (1/4) = 3/16.

      The law of independent assortment also indicates that a cross between yellow, wrinkled (YYrr) and green, round
      (yyRR) parents would yield the same F1 and F2 offspring as in the YYRR x yyrr cross.

      The physical basis for the law of independent assortment also lies in meiosis I, in which the different homologous
      pairs line up in random orientations. Each gamete can contain any combination of paternal and maternal
      chromosomes (and therefore the genes on them) because the orientation of tetrads on the metaphase plane is
      random.

      Forked-Line Method
      When more than two genes are being considered, the Punnett-square method becomes unwieldy. For instance,
      examining a cross involving four genes would require a 16 × 16 grid containing 256 boxes. It would be extremely
      cumbersome to manually enter each genotype. For more complex crosses, the forked-line and probability methods
      are preferred.

      To prepare a forked-line diagram for a cross between F1 heterozygotes resulting from a cross between AABBCC and
      aabbcc parents, we first create rows equal to the number of genes being considered, and then segregate the alleles
      in each row on forked lines according to the probabilities for individual monohybrid crosses (Figure 12.17). We then
      multiply the values along each forked path to obtain the F2 offspring probabilities. Note that this process is a
      diagrammatic version of the product rule. The values along each forked pathway can be multiplied because each
      gene assorts independently. For a trihybrid cross, the F2 phenotypic ratio is 27:9:9:9:3:3:3:1.




      FIGURE 12.17 The forked-line method can be used to analyze a trihybrid cross. Here, the probability for color in the F2 generation occupies
      the top row (3 yellow:1 green). The probability for shape occupies the second row (3 round: 1 wrinkled), and the probability for height
      occupies the third row (3 tall:1 dwarf). The probability for each possible combination of traits is calculated by multiplying the probability for
      each individual trait. Thus, the probability of F2 offspring having yellow, round, and tall traits is 3 × 3 × 3, or 27.

      Probability Method
      While the forked-line method is a diagrammatic approach to keeping track of probabilities in a cross, the probability
      method gives the proportions of offspring expected to exhibit each phenotype (or genotype) without the added
      visual assistance. Both methods make use of the product rule and consider the alleles for each gene separately.
      Earlier, we examined the phenotypic proportions for a trihybrid cross using the forked-line method; now we will use
      the probability method to examine the genotypic proportions for a cross with even more genes.

      For a trihybrid cross, writing out the forked-line method is tedious, albeit not as tedious as using the Punnett-square
      method. To fully demonstrate the power of the probability method, however, we can consider specific genetic
      calculations. For instance, for a tetrahybrid cross between individuals that are heterozygotes for all four genes, and
      in which all four genes are sorting independently and in a dominant and recessive pattern, what proportion of the
      offspring will be expected to be homozygous recessive for all four alleles? Rather than writing out every possible
      genotype, we can use the probability method. We know that for each gene, the fraction of homozygous recessive
      offspring will be 1/4. Therefore, multiplying this fraction for each of the four genes, (1/4) × (1/4) × (1/4) × (1/4), we
      determine that 1/256 of the offspring will be quadruply homozygous recessive.

      For the same tetrahybrid cross, what is the expected proportion of offspring that have the dominant phenotype at all
      four loci? We can answer this question using phenotypic proportions, but let’s do it the hard way—using genotypic



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              12.3 • Laws of Inheritance   335



proportions. The question asks for the proportion of offspring that are 1) homozygous dominant at A or heterozygous
at A, and 2) homozygous at B or heterozygous at B, and so on. Noting the “or” and “and” in each circumstance
makes clear where to apply the sum and product rules. The probability of a homozygous dominant at A is 1/4 and
the probability of a heterozygote at A is 1/2. The probability of the homozygote or the heterozygote is 1/4 + 1/2 =
3/4 using the sum rule. The same probability can be obtained in the same way for each of the other genes, so that
the probability of a dominant phenotype at A and B and C and D is, using the product rule, equal to 3/4 × 3/4 × 3/4 ×
3/4, or 81/256. If you are ever unsure about how to combine probabilities, returning to the forked-line method
should make it clear.

Rules for Multihybrid Fertilization
Predicting the genotypes and phenotypes of offspring from given crosses is the best way to test your knowledge of
Mendelian genetics. Given a multihybrid cross that obeys independent assortment and follows a dominant and
recessive pattern, several generalized rules exist; you can use these rules to check your results as you work through
genetics calculations (Table 12.5). To apply these rules, first you must determine n, the number of heterozygous
gene pairs (the number of genes segregating two alleles each). For example, a cross between AaBb and AaBb
heterozygotes has an n of 2. In contrast, a cross between AABb and AABb has an n of 1 because A is not
heterozygous.

                                       General Rules for Multihybrid Crosses

                                                                                 Number of Heterozygous Gene
                                General Rule
                                                                                            Pairs

 Number of different F1 gametes                                                 2n

 Number of different F2 genotypes                                               3n

 Given dominant and recessive inheritance, the number of different F2
                                                                                2n
 phenotypes

TABLE 12.5

Linked Genes Violate the Law of Independent Assortment
Although all of Mendel’s pea characteristics behaved according to the law of independent assortment, we now know
that some allele combinations are not inherited independently of each other. Genes that are located on separate
non-homologous chromosomes will always sort independently. However, each chromosome contains hundreds or
thousands of genes, organized linearly on chromosomes like beads on a string. The segregation of alleles into
gametes can be influenced by linkage, in which genes that are located physically close to each other on the same
chromosome are more likely to be inherited as a pair. However, because of the process of recombination, or
“crossover,” it is possible for two genes on the same chromosome to behave independently, or as if they are not
linked. To understand this, let’s consider the biological basis of gene linkage and recombination.

Homologous chromosomes possess the same genes in the same linear order. The alleles may differ on homologous
chromosome pairs, but the genes to which they correspond do not. In preparation for the first division of meiosis,
homologous chromosomes replicate and synapse. Like genes on the homologs align with each other. At this stage,
segments of homologous chromosomes exchange linear segments of genetic material (Figure 12.18). This process
is called recombination, or crossover, and it is a common genetic process. Because the genes are aligned during
recombination, the gene order is not altered. Instead, the result of recombination is that maternal and paternal
alleles are combined onto the same chromosome. Across a given chromosome, several recombination events may
occur, causing extensive shuffling of alleles.
336   12 • Mendel's Experiments and Heredity




      FIGURE 12.18 The process of crossover, or recombination, occurs when two homologous chromosomes align during meiosis and exchange
      a segment of genetic material. Here, the alleles for gene C were exchanged. The result is two recombinant and two non-recombinant
      chromosomes (for clarity, only one recombination event between two of the four chromatids is represented).

      When two genes are located in close proximity on the same chromosome, they are considered linked, and their
      alleles tend to be transmitted through meiosis together. To exemplify this, imagine a dihybrid cross involving flower
      color and plant height in which the genes are next to each other on the chromosome. If one homologous
      chromosome has alleles for tall plants and red flowers, and the other chromosome has genes for short plants and
      yellow flowers, then when the gametes are formed, the tall and red alleles will go together into a gamete and the
      short and yellow alleles will go into other gametes. These are called the parental genotypes because they have been
      inherited intact from the parents of the individual producing gametes. But unlike if the genes were on different
      chromosomes, there will be no gametes with tall and yellow alleles and no gametes with short and red alleles. If you
      create the Punnett square with these gametes, you will see that the classical Mendelian prediction of a 9:3:3:1
      outcome of a dihybrid cross would not apply. As the distance between two genes increases, the probability of one or
      more crossovers between them increases, and the genes behave more like they are on separate chromosomes.
      Geneticists have used the proportion of recombinant gametes (the ones not like the parents) as a measure of how
      far apart genes are on a chromosome. Using this information, they have constructed elaborate maps of genes on
      chromosomes for well-studied organisms, including humans.

      Mendel’s seminal publication makes no mention of linkage, and many researchers have questioned whether he
      encountered linkage but chose not to publish those crosses out of concern that they would invalidate his
      independent assortment postulate. The garden pea has seven pairs of chromosomes, and some have suggested that
      his choice of seven characteristics was not a coincidence. However, even if the genes he examined were not located
      on separate chromosomes, it is possible that he simply did not observe linkage because of the extensive shuffling
      effects of recombination.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               12.3 • Laws of Inheritance   337




        SCIENTIFIC METHOD CONNECTION

Testing the Hypothesis of Independent Assortment
To better appreciate the amount of labor and ingenuity that went into Mendel’s experiments, proceed through one of
Mendel’s dihybrid crosses.

Question: What will be the offspring of a dihybrid cross?

Background: Consider that pea plants mature in one growing season, and you have access to a large garden in
which you can cultivate thousands of pea plants. There are several true-breeding plants with the following pairs of
traits: tall plants with inflated pods, and dwarf plants with constricted pods. Before the plants have matured, you
remove the pollen-producing organs from the tall/inflated plants in your crosses to prevent self-fertilization. Upon
plant maturation, the plants are manually crossed by transferring pollen from the dwarf/constricted plants to the
stigmata of the tall/inflated plants.

Hypothesis: Both trait pairs will sort independently according to Mendelian laws. When the true-breeding parents
are crossed, all of the F1 offspring are tall and have inflated pods, which indicates that the tall and inflated traits are
dominant over the dwarf and constricted traits, respectively. A self-cross of the F1 heterozygotes results in 2,000 F2
progeny.

Test the hypothesis: Because each trait pair sorts independently, the ratios of tall:dwarf and inflated:constricted
are each expected to be 3:1. The tall/dwarf trait pair is called T/t, and the inflated/constricted trait pair is designated
I/i. Each member of the F1 generation therefore has a genotype of TtIi. Construct a grid analogous to Figure 12.16,
in which you cross two TtIi individuals. Each individual can donate four combinations of two traits: TI, Ti, tI, or ti,
meaning that there are 16 possibilities of offspring genotypes. Because the T and I alleles are dominant, any
individual having one or two of those alleles will express the tall or inflated phenotypes, respectively, regardless if
they also have a t or i allele. Only individuals that are tt or ii will express the dwarf and constricted alleles,
respectively. As shown in Figure 12.19, you predict that you will observe the following offspring proportions: tall/
inflated:tall/constricted:dwarf/inflated:dwarf/constricted in a 9:3:3:1 ratio. Notice from the grid that when
considering the tall/dwarf and inflated/constricted trait pairs in isolation, they are each inherited in 3:1 ratios.




FIGURE 12.19 This figure shows all possible combinations of offspring resulting from a dihybrid cross of pea plants that are heterozygous
for the tall/dwarf and inflated/constricted alleles.

Test the hypothesis: You cross the dwarf and tall plants and then self-cross the offspring. For best results, this is
repeated with hundreds or even thousands of pea plants. What special precautions should be taken in the crosses
and in growing the plants?
338   12 • Mendel's Experiments and Heredity



      Analyze your data: You observe the following plant phenotypes in the F2 generation: 2706 tall/inflated, 930 tall/
      constricted, 888 dwarf/inflated, and 300 dwarf/constricted. Reduce these findings to a ratio and determine if they
      are consistent with Mendelian laws.

      Form a conclusion: Were the results close to the expected 9:3:3:1 phenotypic ratio? Do the results support the
      prediction? What might be observed if far fewer plants were used, given that alleles segregate randomly into
      gametes? Try to imagine growing that many pea plants, and consider the potential for experimental error. For
      instance, what would happen if it was extremely windy one day?


      Epistasis
      Mendel’s studies in pea plants implied that the sum of an individual’s phenotype was controlled by genes (or as he
      called them, unit factors), such that every characteristic was distinctly and completely controlled by a single gene.
      In fact, single observable characteristics are almost always under the influence of multiple genes (each with two or
      more alleles) acting in unison. For example, at least eight genes contribute to eye color in humans.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      Eye color in humans is determined by multiple genes. Use the Eye Color Calculator (https://openstax.org/l/
      eye_color_calc) to predict the eye color of children from parental eye color.


      In some cases, several genes can contribute to aspects of a common phenotype without their gene products ever
      directly interacting. In the case of organ development, for instance, genes may be expressed sequentially, with each
      gene adding to the complexity and specificity of the organ. Genes may function in complementary or synergistic
      fashions, such that two or more genes need to be expressed simultaneously to affect a phenotype. Genes may also
      oppose each other, with one gene modifying the expression of another.

      In epistasis, the interaction between genes is antagonistic, such that one gene masks or interferes with the
      expression of another. “Epistasis” is a word composed of Greek roots that mean “standing upon.” The alleles that
      are being masked or silenced are said to be hypostatic to the epistatic alleles that are doing the masking. Often the
      biochemical basis of epistasis is a gene pathway in which the expression of one gene is dependent on the function of
      a gene that precedes or follows it in the pathway.

      An example of epistasis is pigmentation in mice. The wild-type coat color, agouti (AA), is dominant to solid-colored
      fur (aa). However, a separate gene (C) is necessary for pigment production. A mouse with a recessive c allele at this
      locus is unable to produce pigment and is albino regardless of the allele present at locus A (Figure 12.20).
      Therefore, the genotypes AAcc, Aacc, and aacc all produce the same albino phenotype. A cross between
      heterozygotes for both genes (AaCc x AaCc) would generate offspring with a phenotypic ratio of 9 agouti:3 solid
      color:4 albino (Figure 12.20). In this case, the C gene is epistatic to the A gene.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                12.3 • Laws of Inheritance     339




FIGURE 12.20 In mice, the mottled agouti coat color (A) is dominant to a solid coloration, such as black or gray. A gene at a separate locus
(C) is responsible for pigment production. The recessive c allele does not produce pigment, and a mouse with the homozygous recessive cc
genotype is albino regardless of the allele present at the A locus. Thus, the C gene is epistatic to the A gene.

Epistasis can also occur when a dominant allele masks expression at a separate gene. Fruit color in summer squash
is expressed in this way. Homozygous recessive expression of the W gene (ww) coupled with homozygous dominant
or heterozygous expression of the Y gene (YY or Yy) generates yellow fruit, and the wwyy genotype produces green
fruit. However, if a dominant copy of the W gene is present in the homozygous or heterozygous form, the summer
squash will produce white fruit regardless of the Y alleles. A cross between white heterozygotes for both genes
(WwYy × WwYy) would produce offspring with a phenotypic ratio of 12 white:3 yellow:1 green.

Finally, epistasis can be reciprocal such that either gene, when present in the dominant (or recessive) form,
expresses the same phenotype. In the shepherd’s purse plant (Capsella bursa-pastoris), the characteristic of seed
shape is controlled by two genes in a dominant epistatic relationship. When the genes A and B are both homozygous
recessive (aabb), the seeds are ovoid. If the dominant allele for either of these genes is present, the result is
triangular seeds. That is, every possible genotype other than aabb results in triangular seeds, and a cross between
heterozygotes for both genes (AaBb x AaBb) would yield offspring with a phenotypic ratio of 15 triangular:1 ovoid.

As you work through genetics problems, keep in mind that any single characteristic that results in a phenotypic ratio
that totals 16 is typical of a two-gene interaction. Recall the phenotypic inheritance pattern for Mendel’s dihybrid
cross, which considered two noninteracting genes—9:3:3:1. Similarly, we would expect interacting gene pairs to also
exhibit ratios expressed as 16 parts. Note that we are assuming the interacting genes are not linked; they are still
assorting independently into gametes.
340   12 • Key Terms




Key Terms
allele gene variations that arise by mutation and exist          of two contrasting alleles such that the individual
   at the same relative locations on homologous                  displays an intermediate phenotype
   chromosomes                                                law of dominance in a heterozygote, one trait will
autosomes any of the non-sex chromosomes                         conceal the presence of another trait for the same
blending theory of inheritance hypothetical                      characteristic
   inheritance pattern in which parental traits are           law of independent assortment genes do not
   blended together in the offspring to produce an               influence each other with regard to sorting of alleles
   intermediate physical appearance                              into gametes; every possible combination of alleles
codominance in a heterozygote, complete and                      is equally likely to occur
   simultaneous expression of both alleles for the            law of segregation paired unit factors (i.e., genes)
   same characteristic                                           segregate equally into gametes such that offspring
continuous variation inheritance pattern in which a              have an equal likelihood of inheriting any
   character shows a range of trait values with small            combination of factors
   gradations rather than large gaps between them             linkage phenomenon in which alleles that are located
dihybrid result of a cross between two true-breeding             in close proximity to each other on the same
   parents that express different traits for two                 chromosome are more likely to be inherited
   characteristics                                               together
discontinuous variation inheritance pattern in which          model system species or biological system used to
   traits are distinct and are transmitted independently         study a specific biological phenomenon to be
   of one another                                                applied to other different species
dominant trait which confers the same physical                monohybrid result of a cross between two true-
   appearance whether an individual has two copies of            breeding parents that express different traits for
   the trait or one copy of the dominant trait and one           only one characteristic
   copy of the recessive trait                                P0 parental generation in a cross
dominant lethal inheritance pattern in which an               phenotype observable traits expressed by an
   allele is lethal both in the homozygote and the               organism
   heterozygote; this allele can only be transmitted if       product rule probability of two independent events
   the lethality phenotype occurs after reproductive             occurring simultaneously can be calculated by
   age                                                           multiplying the individual probabilities of each event
epistasis antagonistic interaction between genes                 occurring alone
   such that one gene masks or interferes with the            Punnett square visual representation of a cross
   expression of another                                         between two individuals in which the gametes of
F1 first filial generation in a cross; the offspring of the      each individual are denoted along the top and side
   parental generation                                           of a grid, respectively, and the possible zygotic
F2 second filial generation produced when F1                     genotypes are recombined at each box in the grid
   individuals are self-crossed or fertilized with each       recessive trait that appears “latent” or non-
   other                                                         expressed when the individual also carries a
genotype underlying genetic makeup, consisting of                dominant trait for that same characteristic; when
   both physically visible and non-expressed alleles, of         present as two identical copies, the recessive trait is
   an organism                                                   expressed
hemizygous presence of only one allele for a                  recessive lethal inheritance pattern in which an
   characteristic, as in X-linkage; hemizygosity makes           allele is only lethal in the homozygous form; the
   descriptions of dominance and recessiveness                   heterozygote may be normal or have some altered,
   irrelevant                                                    nonlethal phenotype
heterozygous having two different alleles for a given         reciprocal cross paired cross in which the respective
   gene on the homologous chromosome                             traits of the male and female in one cross become
homozygous having two identical alleles for a given              the respective traits of the female and male in the
   gene on the homologous chromosome                             other cross
hybridization process of mating two individuals that          sex-linked any gene on a sex chromosome
   differ with the goal of achieving a certain                sum rule probability of the occurrence of at least one
   characteristic in their offspring                             of two mutually exclusive events is the sum of their
incomplete dominance in a heterozygote, expression               individual probabilities



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             12 • Chapter Summary    341



test cross cross between a dominant expressing                 trait variation in the physical appearance of a
   individual with an unknown genotype and a                      heritable characteristic
   homozygous recessive individual; the offspring              X-linked gene present on the X, but not the Y
   phenotypes indicate whether the unknown parent is              chromosome
   heterozygous or homozygous for the dominant trait

Chapter Summary
12.1 Mendel’s Experiments and the Laws of                      exhibit a ratio of three dominant to one recessive.
Probability                                                    Alleles do not always behave in dominant and
Working with garden pea plants, Mendel found that              recessive patterns. Incomplete dominance describes
crosses between parents that differed by one trait             situations in which the heterozygote exhibits a
produced F1 offspring that all expressed the traits of         phenotype that is intermediate between the
one parent. Observable traits are referred to as               homozygous phenotypes. Codominance describes the
dominant, and non-expressed traits are described as            simultaneous expression of both of the alleles in the
recessive. When the offspring in Mendel’s experiment           heterozygote. Although diploid organisms can only
were self-crossed, the F2 offspring exhibited the              have two alleles for any given gene, it is common for
dominant trait or the recessive trait in a 3:1 ratio,          more than two alleles of a gene to exist in a population.
confirming that the recessive trait had been                   In humans, as in many animals and some plants,
transmitted faithfully from the original P0 parent.            females have two X chromosomes and males have one
Reciprocal crosses generated identical F1 and F2               X and one Y chromosome. Genes that are present on
offspring ratios. By examining sample sizes, Mendel            the X but not the Y chromosome are said to be X-
showed that his crosses behaved reproducibly                   linked, such that males only inherit one allele for the
according to the laws of probability, and that the traits      gene, and females inherit two. Finally, some alleles can
were inherited as independent events.                          be lethal. Recessive lethal alleles are only lethal in
                                                               homozygotes, but dominant lethal alleles are fatal in
Two rules in probability can be used to find the               heterozygotes as well.
expected proportions of offspring of different traits
from different crosses. To find the probability of two or      12.3 Laws of Inheritance
more independent events occurring together, apply the
                                                               Mendel postulated that genes (characteristics) are
product rule and multiply the probabilities of the
                                                               inherited as pairs of alleles (traits) that behave in a
individual events. The use of the word “and” suggests
                                                               dominant and recessive pattern. Alleles segregate into
the appropriate application of the product rule. To find
                                                               gametes such that each gamete is equally likely to
the probability of two or more events occurring in
                                                               receive either one of the two alleles present in a diploid
combination, apply the sum rule and add their
                                                               individual. In addition, genes are assorted into
individual probabilities together. The use of the word
                                                               gametes independently of one another. That is, alleles
“or” suggests the appropriate application of the sum
                                                               are generally not more likely to segregate into a
rule.
                                                               gamete with a particular allele of another gene. A
12.2 Characteristics and Traits                                dihybrid cross demonstrates independent assortment
                                                               when the genes in question are on different
When true-breeding or homozygous individuals that              chromosomes or distant from each other on the same
differ for a certain trait are crossed, all of the offspring   chromosome. For crosses involving more than two
will be heterozygotes for that trait. If the traits are        genes, use the forked line or probability methods to
inherited as dominant and recessive, the F1 offspring          predict offspring genotypes and phenotypes rather
will all exhibit the same phenotype as the parent              than a Punnett square.
homozygous for the dominant trait. If these
heterozygous offspring are self-crossed, the resulting         Although chromosomes sort independently into
F2 offspring will be equally likely to inherit gametes         gametes during meiosis, Mendel’s law of independent
carrying the dominant or recessive trait, giving rise to       assortment refers to genes, not chromosomes, and a
offspring of which one quarter are homozygous                  single chromosome may carry more than 1,000 genes.
dominant, half are heterozygous, and one quarter are           When genes are located in close proximity on the same
homozygous recessive. Because homozygous dominant              chromosome, their alleles tend to be inherited
and heterozygous individuals are phenotypically                together. This results in offspring ratios that violate
identical, the observed traits in the F2 offspring will        Mendel's law of independent assortment. However,
342   12 • Visual Connection Questions



recombination serves to exchange genetic material on        independently because of recombination events that
homologous chromosomes such that maternal and               occurred in the intervening chromosomal space.
paternal alleles may be recombined on the same
                                                            Whether or not they are sorting independently, genes
chromosome. This is why alleles on a given
                                                            may interact at the level of gene products such that the
chromosome are not always inherited together.
                                                            expression of an allele for one gene masks or modifies
Recombination is a random event occurring anywhere
                                                            the expression of an allele for a different gene. This is
on a chromosome. Therefore, genes that are far apart
                                                            called epistasis.
on the same chromosome are likely to still assort

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 12.5 In pea plants, round peas (R) are               individuals labeled 1, 2, and 3?
      dominant to wrinkled peas (r). You do a test
                                                               3. Figure 12.12 What ratio of offspring would result
      cross between a pea plant with wrinkled peas
                                                                  from a cross between a white-eyed male and a
      (genotype rr) and a plant of unknown genotype
                                                                  female that is heterozygous for red eye color?
      that has round peas. You end up with three
      plants, all which have round peas. From this             4. Figure 12.16 In pea plants, round seed shape
      data, can you tell if the round pea parent plant is         (R) is dominant to wrinkled seed shape (r) and
      homozygous dominant or heterozygous? If the                 yellow peas (Y) are dominant to green peas (y).
      round pea parent plant is heterozygous, what is             What are the possible genotypes and
      the probability that a random sample of 3                   phenotypes for a cross between RrYY and rrYy
      progeny peas will all be round?                             pea plants? How many squares do you need to
                                                                  do a Punnett square analysis of this cross?
   2. Figure 12.6 What are the genotypes of the

Review Questions
   5. Mendel performed hybridizations by transferring             according to a dominant/recessive pattern in
      pollen from the _______ of the male plant to the            which inflated pods were dominant. If you
      female ova.                                                 performed this cross and obtained 650 inflated-
        a. anther                                                 pod plants in the F2 generation, approximately
        b. pistil                                                 how many constricted-pod plants would you
        c. stigma                                                 expect to have?
        d. seed                                                     a. 600
                                                                    b. 165
   6. Which is one of the seven characteristics that                c. 217
      Mendel observed in pea plants?                                d. 468
       a. flower size
       b. seed texture                                         9. A scientist pollinates a true-breeding pea plant
       c. leaf shape                                              with violet, terminal flowers with pollen from a
       d. stem color                                              true-breeding pea plant with white, axial
                                                                  flowers. Which of the following observations
   7. Imagine you are performing a cross involving                would most accurately describe the F2
      seed color in garden pea plants. What F1                    generation?
      offspring would you expect if you cross true-                  a. 75% violet flowers; 75% terminal flowers
      breeding parents with green seeds and yellow                   b. 75% white flowers in a terminal position
      seeds? Yellow seed color is dominant over                      c. 75% violet flowers; 75% axial flowers
      green.                                                         d. 75% violet flowers in an axial position
        a. 100 percent yellow-green seeds
        b. 100 percent yellow seeds                          10. The observable traits expressed by an organism
        c. 50 percent yellow, 50 percent green seeds             are described as its ________.
        d. 25 percent green, 75 percent yellow seeds               a. phenotype
                                                                   b. genotype
   8. Consider a cross to investigate the pea pod                  c. alleles
      texture trait, involving constricted or inflated             d. zygote
      pods. Mendel found that the traits behave


Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      12 • Review Questions   343



11. A recessive trait will be observed in individuals         all the chickens are black with white speckles
    that are ________ for that trait.                         throughout their feathers. What should the
      a. heterozygous                                         farmer expect when the eggs laid after
      b. homozygous or heterozygous                           interbreeding the speckled chickens hatch?
      c. homozygous                                              a. All the offspring will be speckled.
      d. diploid                                                 b. 75% of the offspring will be speckled, and
                                                                     25% will be black.
12. If black and white true-breeding mice are mated              c. 50% of the offspring will be speckled,
    and the result is all gray offspring, what                       25% will be black, and 25% will be white.
    inheritance pattern would this be indicative of?            d. 50% of the offspring will be black and
       a. dominance                                                  50% of the offspring will be white.
       b. codominance
       c. multiple alleles                                17. Assuming no gene linkage, in a dihybrid cross of
       d. incomplete dominance                                AABB x aabb with AaBb F1 heterozygotes, what
                                                              is the ratio of the F1 gametes (AB, aB, Ab, ab)
13. The ABO blood groups in humans are expressed              that will give rise to the F2 offspring?
    as the IA, IB, and i alleles. The IA allele encodes          a. 1:1:1:1
    the A blood group antigen, IB encodes B, and i               b. 1:3:3:1
    encodes O. Both A and B are dominant to O. If a              c. 1:2:2:1
    heterozygous blood type A parent (IAi) and a                 d. 4:3:2:1
    heterozygous blood type B parent (IBi) mate,
    one quarter of their offspring will have AB blood     18. The forked line and probability methods make
    type (IAIB) in which both antigens are expressed          use of what probability rule?
    equally. Therefore, ABO blood groups are an                 a. test cross
    example of:                                                 b. product rule
      a. multiple alleles and incomplete                        c. monohybrid rule
          dominance                                             d. sum rule
      b. codominance and incomplete dominance
      c. incomplete dominance only                        19. How many different offspring genotypes are
      d. multiple alleles and codominance                     expected in a trihybrid cross between parents
                                                              heterozygous for all three traits when the traits
14. In a mating between two individuals that are              behave in a dominant and recessive pattern?
    heterozygous for a recessive lethal allele that is        How many phenotypes?
    expressed in utero, what genotypic ratio                    a. 64 genotypes; 16 phenotypes
    (homozygous                                                 b. 16 genotypes; 64 phenotypes
    dominant:heterozygous:homozygous recessive)                 c. 8 genotypes; 27 phenotypes
    would you expect to observe in the offspring?               d. 27 genotypes; 8 phenotypes
      a. 1:2:1
      b. 3:1:1                                            20. Labrador retrievers’ fur color is controlled by two
      c. 1:2:0                                                alleles, E and B. Any dog with the ee__ genotype
      d. 0:2:1                                                develops into a yellow lab, while B_E_ dogs
                                                              become black labs and bbE_ dogs become
15. If the allele encoding polydactyly (six fingers) is       chocolate labs. This is an example of _____.
    dominant why do most people have five fingers?               a. epistasis
       a. Genetic elements suppress the polydactyl               b. codominance
           gene.                                                 c. incomplete dominance
       b. Polydactyly is embryonic lethal.                      d. linkage
       c. The sixth finger is removed at birth.
       d. The polydactyl allele is very rare in the       21. Which of the following situations does not follow
           human population.                                  the Law of Independent Assortment?
                                                                a. A blond person and a brown-haired person
16. A farmer raises black and white chickens. To his                produce three offspring over time, all of
    surprise, when the first generation of eggs hatch               who have blond hair.
344   12 • Critical Thinking Questions



         b. A white cow crossed with a brown bull                     female piglets.
            produces roan cattle.                                  d. Men are more likely to experience
         c. Mating a hog with a sow produces six                      hemophilia than women.


Critical Thinking Questions
  22. Describe one of the reasons why the garden pea        28. Can a human male be a carrier of red-green
      was an excellent choice of model system for               color blindness?
      studying inheritance.
                                                            29. Why is it more efficient to perform a test cross
  23. How would you perform a reciprocal cross for              with a homozygous recessive donor than a
      the characteristic of stem height in the garden           homozygous dominant donor? How could the
      pea?                                                      same information still be found with a
                                                                homozygous dominant donor?
  24. Mendel performs a cross using a true-breeding
      pea plant with round, yellow seeds and a true-        30. Use the probability method to calculate the
      breeding pea plant with green, wrinkled seeds.            genotypes and genotypic proportions of a cross
      What is the probability that offspring will have          between AABBCc and Aabbcc parents.
      green, round seeds? Calculate the probability for
                                                            31. Explain epistasis in terms of its Greek-language
      the F1 and F2 generations.
                                                                roots “standing upon.”
  25. Calculate the probability of selecting a heart or a
                                                            32. In Section 12.3, “Laws of Inheritance,” an
      face card when heart suit face cards are
                                                                example of epistasis was given for the summer
      excluded from a standard deck of cards. Is this
                                                                squash. Cross white WwYy heterozygotes to
      outcome more or less likely than selecting a
                                                                prove the phenotypic ratio of 12 white:3
      heart suit face card from a standard deck of
                                                                yellow:1 green that was given in the text.
      cards?
                                                            33. People with trisomy 21 develop Down’s
  26. The gene for flower position in pea plants exists
                                                                syndrome. What law of Mendelian inheritance is
      as axial or terminal alleles. Given that axial is
                                                                violated in this disease? What is the most likely
      dominant to terminal, list all of the possible F1
                                                                way this occurs?
      and F2 genotypes and phenotypes from a cross
      involving parents that are homozygous for each        34. A heterozygous pea plant produces violet
      trait. Express genotypes with conventional                flowers and yellow, round seeds. Describe the
      genetic abbreviations.                                    expected genotypes of the gametes produced by
                                                                Mendelian inheritance. If all three genes are
  27. Use a Punnett square to predict the offspring in
                                                                found on the same arm of one chromosome
      a cross between a dwarf pea plant (homozygous
                                                                should a scientist predict that inheritance
      recessive) and a tall pea plant (heterozygous).
                                                                patterns will follow Mendelian genetics?
      What is the phenotypic ratio of the offspring?




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 13
Modern Understandings of Inheritance




FIGURE 13.1 Chromosomes are threadlike nuclear structures consisting of DNA and proteins that serve as the
repositories for genetic information. The chromosomes depicted here were isolated from a fruit fly’s salivary gland,
stained with dye, and visualized under a microscope. Akin to miniature bar codes, chromosomes absorb different
dyes to produce characteristic banding patterns, which allows for their routine identification. (credit: modification of
work by “LPLT”/Wikimedia Commons; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)


CHAPTER OUTLINE
13.1 Chromosomal Theory and Genetic Linkage
13.2 Chromosomal Basis of Inherited Disorders


INTRODUCTION The gene is the physical unit of inheritance, and genes are arranged in a linear
order on chromosomes. Chromosome behavior and interaction during meiosis explain, at a
cellular level, inheritance patterns that we observe in populations. Genetic disorders involving
alterations in chromosome number or structure may have dramatic effects and can prevent a
fertilized egg from developing.

13.1 Chromosomal Theory and Genetic Linkage
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Discuss Sutton’s Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance
   • Describe genetic linkage
   • Explain the process of homologous recombination, or crossing over
   • Describe chromosome creation
   • Calculate the distances between three genes on a chromosome using a three-point test
      cross

Long before scientists visualized chromosomes under a microscope, the father of modern
genetics, Gregor Mendel, began studying heredity in 1843. With improved microscopic techniques
during the late 1800s, cell biologists could stain and visualize subcellular structures with dyes and
observe their actions during cell division and meiosis. With each mitotic division, chromosomes
replicated, condensed from an amorphous (no constant shape) nuclear mass into distinct X-
shaped bodies (pairs of identical sister chromatids), and migrated to separate cellular poles.
346   13 • Modern Understandings of Inheritance



      Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance
      The speculation that chromosomes might be the key to understanding heredity led several
      scientists to examine Mendel’s publications and reevaluate his model in terms of chromosome
      behavior during mitosis and meiosis. In 1902, Theodor Boveri observed that proper sea urchin
      embryonic development does not occur unless chromosomes are present. That same year, Walter
      Sutton observed chromosome separation into daughter cells during meiosis (Figure 13.2).
      Together, these observations led to the Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance, which identified
      chromosomes as the genetic material responsible for Mendelian inheritance.




      FIGURE 13.2 (a) Walter Sutton and (b) Theodor Boveri developed the Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance, which
      states that chromosomes carry the unit of heredity (genes). Eleanor Carothers (c), was the first to provide physical
      evidence supporting the theory.

      The Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance was consistent with Mendel’s laws, which the following
      observations supported:

         • During meiosis, homologous chromosome pairs migrate as discrete structures that are
           independent of other chromosome pairs.
         • Chromosome sorting from each homologous pair into pre-gametes appears to be random.
         • Each parent synthesizes gametes that contain only half their chromosomal complement.
         • Even though male and female gametes (sperm and egg) differ in size and morphology, they
           have the same number of chromosomes, suggesting equal genetic contributions from each
           parent.
         • The gametic chromosomes combine during fertilization to produce offspring with the same
           chromosome number as their parents.

      Despite the lack of direct evidence that chromosomes carry traits, the compelling correlation
      between chromosome behavior during meiosis and Mendel's abstract laws led scientists to
      propose the Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance. Critics pointed out that individuals had far more
      independently segregating traits than they had chromosomes. About ten years after the theory
      was proposed, Eleanor Carothers was the first to discover physical evidence supporting it; she
      observed independent chromosome assortment in grasshoppers. Then, after several years of
      carrying out crosses with the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, Thomas Hunt Morgan provided
      additional experimental evidence to support the Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance.

      Genetic Linkage and Distances
      Mendel’s work suggested that traits are inherited independently of each other. Morgan identified a
      1:1 correspondence between a segregating trait and the X chromosome, suggesting that random
      chromosome segregation was the physical basis of Mendel’s model. This also demonstrated that
      linked genes disrupt Mendel’s predicted outcomes. That each chromosome can carry many linked
      genes explains how individuals can have many more traits than they have chromosomes. However,


      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           13.1 • Chromosomal Theory and Genetic Linkage   347



researchers in Morgan’s laboratory suggested that alleles positioned on the same chromosome were not always
inherited together. During meiosis, linked genes somehow became unlinked.

Homologous Recombination
In 1909, Frans Janssen observed chiasmata—the point at which chromatids are in contact with each other and may
exchange segments—prior to the first meiotic division. He suggested that alleles become unlinked and
chromosomes physically exchange segments. As chromosomes condensed and paired with their homologs, they
appeared to interact at distinct points. Janssen suggested that these points corresponded to regions in which
chromosome segments exchanged. We now know that the pairing and interaction between homologous
chromosomes, or synapsis, does more than simply organize the homologs for migration to separate daughter cells.
When synapsed, homologous chromosomes undergo reciprocal physical exchanges at their arms in homologous
recombination, or more simply, “crossing over.”

To better understand the type of experimental results that researchers were obtaining at this time, consider a
heterozygous individual that inherited dominant maternal alleles for two genes on the same chromosome (such as A
and B) and two recessive paternal alleles for those same genes (such as a and b). If the genes are linked, one would
expect this individual to produce gametes that are either AB or ab with a 1:1 ratio. If the genes are unlinked, the
individual should produce AB, Ab, aB, and ab gametes with equal frequencies, according to the Mendelian concept
of independent assortment. Because they correspond to new allele combinations, the genotypes Ab and aB are
nonparental types that result from homologous recombination during meiosis. Parental types are progeny that
exhibit the same allelic combination as their parents. Morgan and his colleagues, however, found that when they test
crossed such heterozygous individuals to a homozygous recessive parent (AaBb × aabb), both parental and
nonparental cases occurred. For example, 950 offspring might be recovered that were either AaBb or aabb, but 50
offspring would also result that were either Aabb or aaBb. These results suggested that linkage occurred most often,
but a significant minority of offspring were the products of recombination.

One of the experiments in Morgan's lab involving the crosses of flies for two traits, body color (gray or black) and
wing shape (normal and vestigial), demonstrated the recombination events that lead to the development of
nonparental phenotypes (Figure 13.3).
348   13 • Modern Understandings of Inheritance




              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 13.3 This figure shows unlinked and linked gene inheritance patterns. The example used includes fruit fly body color and wing
      length. Fruit flies may have a dominant gray color `b` +, or a recessive black color `b`. They may have dominant long wings vg+, or
      recessive short wings, vg. In (a), two genes are located on different chromosomes so independent assortment occurs during meiosis. The
      offspring have an equal chance of being the parental type (inheriting the same combination of traits as the parents) or a nonparental type
      (inheriting a different combination of traits than the parents). In (b), two genes are very close together on the same chromosome so that no
      crossing over occurs between them. Therefore, the genes are always inherited together and all the offspring are the parental type. In (c),
      two genes are far apart on the chromosome such that crossing over occurs during every meiotic event. The recombination frequency will be




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    13.1 • Chromosomal Theory and Genetic Linkage       349



the same as if the genes were on separate chromosomes. (d) The actual recombination frequency of fruit fly wing length and body color
that Thomas Morgan observed in 1912 was 17 percent. A crossover frequency between 0 percent and 50 percent indicates that the genes
are on the same chromosome and crossover sometimes occurs.

In a test cross for two characteristics such as the one here, can the recombinant offspring's predicted frequency be
60 percent? Why or why not?


Genetic Maps
Janssen did not have the technology to demonstrate crossing over so it remained an abstract idea that scientists did
not widely believe. Scientists thought chiasmata were a variation on synapsis and could not understand how
chromosomes could break and rejoin. Yet, the data were clear that linkage did not always occur. Ultimately, it took a
young undergraduate student and an “all-nighter” to mathematically elucidate the linkage and recombination
problem.

In 1913, Alfred Sturtevant, a student in Morgan’s laboratory, gathered results from researchers in the laboratory,
and took them home one night to mull them over. By the next morning, he had created the first “chromosome map,”
a linear representation of gene order and relative distance on a chromosome (Figure 13.4).



        VISUAL CONNECTION




                    FIGURE 13.4 This genetic map orders Drosophila genes on the basis of recombination frequency.

Which of the following statements is true?

  a. Recombination of the body color and red/cinnabar eye alleles will occur more frequently than recombination
     of the alleles for wing length and aristae length.
  b. Recombination of the body color and aristae length alleles will occur more frequently than recombination of
     red/brown eye alleles and the aristae length alleles.
  c. Recombination of the gray/black body color and long/short aristae alleles will not occur.
  d. Recombination of the red/brown eye and long/short aristae alleles will occur more frequently than
     recombination of the alleles for wing length and body color.


As Figure 13.4 shows, by using recombination frequency to predict genetic distance, we can infer the relative gene
order on chromosome 2. The values represent map distances in centimorgans (cM), which correspond to
recombination frequencies (in percent). Therefore, the genes for body color and wing size were 65.5 − 48.5 = 17 cM
apart, indicating that the maternal and paternal alleles for these genes recombine in 17 percent of offspring, on
average.

To construct a chromosome map, Sturtevant assumed that genes were ordered serially on threadlike chromosomes.
He also assumed that the incidence of recombination between two homologous chromosomes could occur with
equal likelihood anywhere along the chromosome's length. Operating under these assumptions, Sturtevant
postulated that alleles that were far apart on a chromosome were more likely to dissociate during meiosis simply
because there was a larger region over which recombination could occur. Conversely, alleles that were close to each
350   13 • Modern Understandings of Inheritance



      other on the chromosome were likely to be inherited together. The average number of crossovers between two
      alleles—that is, their recombination frequency—correlated with their genetic distance from each other, relative to
      the locations of other genes on that chromosome. Considering the example cross between AaBb and aabb above,
      we could calculate the recombination's frequency as 50/1000 = 0.05. That is, the likelihood of a crossover between
      genes A/a and B/b was 0.05, or 5 percent. Such a result would indicate that the genes were definitively linked, but
      that they were far enough apart for crossovers to occasionally occur. Sturtevant divided his genetic map into map
      units, or centimorgans (cM), in which a 0.01 recombination frequency corresponds to 1 cM.

      By representing alleles in a linear map, Sturtevant suggested that genes can range from linking perfectly
      (recombination frequency = 0) to unlinking perfectly (recombination frequency = 0.5) when genes are on different
      chromosomes or genes separate very far apart on the same chromosome. Perfectly unlinked genes correspond to
      the frequencies Mendel predicted to assort independently in a dihybrid cross. A 0.5 recombination frequency
      indicates that 50 percent of offspring are recombinants and the other 50 percent are parental types. That is, every
      type of allele combination is represented with equal frequency. This representation allowed Sturtevant to additively
      calculate distances between several genes on the same chromosome. However, as the genetic distances
      approached 0.50, his predictions became less accurate because it was not clear whether the genes were very far
      apart on the same or on different chromosomes.

      In 1931, Barbara McClintock and Harriet Creighton demonstrated the crossover of homologous chromosomes in
      corn plants. Weeks later, Curt Stern demonstrated microscopically homologous recombination in Drosophila. Stern
      observed several X-linked phenotypes that were associated with a structurally unusual and dissimilar X
      chromosome pair in which one X was missing a small terminal segment, and the other X was fused to a piece of the
      Y chromosome. By crossing flies, observing their offspring, and then visualizing the offspring’s chromosomes, Stern
      demonstrated that every time the offspring allele combination deviated from either of the parental combinations,
      there was a corresponding exchange of an X chromosome segment. Using mutant flies with structurally distinct X
      chromosomes was the key to observing the products of recombination because DNA sequencing and other
      molecular tools were not yet available. We now know that homologous chromosomes regularly exchange segments
      in meiosis by reciprocally breaking and rejoining their DNA at precise locations. Aurora Ruiz-Herrera, for example,
      studies the occurrence of genetic breakpoints at locations in the chromosomes known as fragile sites. By identifying
      chromosomal fragile sites that are shared between humans and other primates, Ruiz-Herrera has provided a deeper
      understanding of mammalian and specifically human evolution.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      Review Sturtevant’s process to create a genetic map on the basis of recombination frequencies here
      (https://openstax.org/l/gene_crossover).


      Mendel’s Mapped Traits
      Homologous recombination is a common genetic process, yet Mendel never observed it. Had he investigated both
      linked and unlinked genes, it would have been much more difficult for him to create a unified model of his data on
      the basis of probabilistic calculations. Researchers who have since mapped the seven traits that Mendel
      investigated onto a pea plant genome's seven chromosomes have confirmed that all the genes he examined are
      either on separate chromosomes or are sufficiently far apart as to be statistically unlinked. Some have suggested
      that Mendel was enormously lucky to select only unlinked genes; whereas, others question whether Mendel
      discarded any data suggesting linkage. In any case, Mendel consistently observed independent assortment because
      he examined genes that were effectively unlinked.

      13.2 Chromosomal Basis of Inherited Disorders
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe how a karyogram is created
         • Explain how nondisjunction leads to disorders in chromosome number
         • Compare disorders that aneuploidy causes
         • Describe how errors in chromosome structure occur through inversions and translocations



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    13.2 • Chromosomal Basis of Inherited Disorders   351



Inherited disorders can arise when chromosomes behave abnormally during meiosis. We can divide chromosome
disorders into two categories: abnormalities in chromosome number and chromosomal structural rearrangements.
Because even small chromosome segments can span many genes, chromosomal disorders are characteristically
dramatic and often fatal.

Chromosome Identification
Chromosome isolation and microscopic observation forms the basis of cytogenetics and is the primary method by
which clinicians detect chromosomal abnormalities in humans. A karyotype is the number and appearance of
chromosomes, and includes their length, banding pattern, and centromere position. To obtain a view of an
individual’s karyotype, cytologists photograph the chromosomes and then cut and paste each chromosome into a
chart, or karyogram. Another name is an ideogram (Figure 13.5).




FIGURE 13.5 This karyotype is of a female human. Notice that homologous chromosomes are the same size, and have the same
centromere positions and banding patterns. A human male would have an XY chromosome pair instead of the XX pair. (credit: Andreas
Blozer et al)

In a given species, we can identify chromosomes by their number, size, centromere position, and banding pattern.
In a human karyotype, autosomes or “body chromosomes” (all of the non–sex chromosomes) are generally
organized in approximate order of size from largest (chromosome 1) to smallest (chromosome 22). The X and Y
chromosomes are not autosomes. However, chromosome 21 is actually shorter than chromosome 22. Researchers
discovered this after naming Down syndrome as trisomy 21, reflecting how this disorder results from possessing
one extra chromosome 21 (three total). Not wanting to change the name of this important disorder, scientists
retained the numbering of chromosome 21 despite describing it having the shortest set of chromosomes. We may
designate the chromosome “arms” projecting from either end of the centromere as short or long, depending on their
relative lengths. We abbreviate the short arm p (for “petite”); whereas, we abbreviate the long arm q (because it
follows “p” alphabetically). Numbers further subdivide and denote each arm. Using this naming system, we can
describe chromosome locations consistently in the scientific literature.



        CAREER CONNECTION

Geneticists Use Karyograms to Identify Chromosomal Aberrations
Although we refer to Mendel as the “father of modern genetics,” he performed his experiments with none of the
tools that the geneticists of today routinely employ. One such powerful cytological technique is karyotyping, a
method in which geneticists can identify traits characterized by chromosomal abnormalities from a single cell. To
observe an individual’s karyotype, a geneticist first collects a person’s cells (like white blood cells) from a blood
sample or other tissue. In the laboratory, the geneticist stimulates the isolated cells to begin actively dividing. The
geneticist then applies the chemical colchicine to cells to arrest condensed chromosomes in metaphase. The
geneticist then induces swelling in the cells using a hypotonic solution so the chromosomes spread apart. Finally,
the geneticist preserves the sample in a fixative and applies it to a slide.

The geneticist then stains chromosomes with one of several dyes to better visualize each chromosome pair's
distinct and reproducible banding patterns. Following staining, the geneticist views the chromosomes using bright-
field microscopy. A common stain choice is the Giemsa stain. Giemsa staining results in approximately 400–800
bands (of tightly coiled DNA and condensed proteins) arranged along all 23 chromosome pairs. An experienced
352   13 • Modern Understandings of Inheritance



      geneticist can identify each band. In addition to the banding patterns, geneticists further identify chromosomes on
      the basis of size and centromere location. To obtain the classic depiction of the karyotype in which homologous
      chromosome pairs align in numerical order from longest to shortest, the geneticist obtains a digital image, identifies
      each chromosome, and manually arranges the chromosomes into this pattern (Figure 13.5).

      At its most basic, the karyogram may reveal genetic abnormalities in which an individual has too many or too few
      chromosomes per cell. Examples of this are Down Syndrome, which one identifies by a third copy of chromosome
      21, and Turner Syndrome, which is characterized by the presence of only one X chromosome in females instead of
      the normal two. Geneticists can also identify large DNA deletions or insertions. For instance, geneticists can identify
      Jacobsen Syndrome—which involves distinctive facial features as well as heart and bleeding defects—by a deletion
      on chromosome 11. Finally, the karyotype can pinpoint translocations, which occur when a segment of genetic
      material breaks from one chromosome and reattaches to another chromosome or to a different part of the same
      chromosome. Translocations are implicated in certain cancers, including chronic myelogenous leukemia.

      During Mendel’s lifetime, inheritance was an abstract concept that one could only infer by performing crosses and
      observing the traits that offspring expressed. By observing a karyogram, today’s geneticists can actually visualize an
      individual's chromosomal composition to confirm or predict genetic abnormalities in offspring, even before birth.


      Chromosome Number Disorders
      Of all of the chromosomal disorders, chromosome number abnormalities are the most obviously identifiable from a
      karyogram. Chromosome number disorders include duplicating or losing entire chromosomes, as well as changes in
      the number of complete sets of chromosomes. They are caused by nondisjunction, which occurs when homologous
      chromosome pairs or sister chromatids fail to separate during meiosis. Misaligned or incomplete synapsis, or a
      spindle apparatus dysfunction that facilitates chromosome migration, can cause nondisjunction. The risk of
      nondisjunction occurring increases with the parents' age.

      Nondisjunction can occur during either meiosis I or II, with differing results (Figure 13.6). If homologous
      chromosomes fail to separate during meiosis I, the result is two gametes that lack that particular chromosome and
      two gametes with two chromosome copies. If sister chromatids fail to separate during meiosis II, the result is one
      gamete that lacks that chromosome, two normal gametes with one chromosome copy, and one gamete with two
      chromosome copies.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     13.2 • Chromosomal Basis of Inherited Disorders      353




        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 13.6 Nondisjunction occurs when homologous chromosomes or sister chromatids fail to separate during meiosis, resulting in an
abnormal chromosome number. Nondisjunction may occur during meiosis I or meiosis II. Credit: Rao, A. and Tag, A. Department of Biology,
Texas A&M University.

Which of the following statements about nondisjunction is true?

  a.   Nondisjunction only results in gametes with n+1 or n–1 chromosomes.
  b.   Nondisjunction occurring during meiosis II results in 50 percent normal gametes.
  c.   Nondisjunction during meiosis I results in 50 percent normal gametes.
  d.   Nondisjunction always results in four different kinds of gametes.


Aneuploidy
Scientists call an individual with the appropriate number of chromosomes for their species euploid. In humans,
euploidy corresponds to 22 pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes. An individual with an error in
chromosome number is described as aneuploid, a term that includes monosomy (losing one chromosome) or
trisomy (gaining an extraneous chromosome). Monosomic human zygotes missing any one copy of an autosome
invariably fail to develop to birth because they lack essential genes. This underscores the importance of “gene
dosage” in humans. Most autosomal trisomies also fail to develop to birth; however, duplications of some smaller
chromosomes (13, 15, 18, 21, or 22) can result in offspring that survive for several weeks to many years. Trisomic
individuals suffer from a different type of genetic imbalance: an excess in gene dose. Individuals with an extra
chromosome may synthesize an abundance of the gene products, which that chromosome encodes. This extra dose
(150 percent) of specific genes can lead to a number of functional challenges and often precludes development. The
most common trisomy among viable births is that of chromosome 21, which corresponds to Down Syndrome. Short
stature and stunted digits, facial distinctions that include a broad skull and large tongue, and significant
developmental delays characterize individuals with this inherited disorder. We can correlate the incidence of Down
syndrome with maternal age. Older people are more likely to become pregnant with fetuses carrying the trisomy 21
genotype (Figure 13.7).
354   13 • Modern Understandings of Inheritance




                        FIGURE 13.7 The incidence of having a fetus with trisomy 21 increases dramatically with maternal age.


           LINK TO LEARNING
      Visualize adding a chromosome that leads to Down syndrome in this video simulation (https://openstax.org/l/
      down_syndrome).


      Polyploidy
      We call an individual with more than the correct number of chromosome sets (two for diploid species) polyploid. For
      instance, fertilizing an abnormal diploid egg with a normal haploid sperm would yield a triploid zygote. Polyploid
      animals are extremely rare, with only a few examples among the flatworms, crustaceans, amphibians, fish, and
      lizards. Polyploid animals are sterile because meiosis cannot proceed normally and instead produces mostly
      aneuploid daughter cells that cannot yield viable zygotes. Rarely, polyploid animals can reproduce asexually by
      haplodiploidy, in which an unfertilized egg divides mitotically to produce offspring. In contrast, polyploidy is very
      common in the plant kingdom, and polyploid plants tend to be larger and more robust than euploids of their species
      (Figure 13.8).




      FIGURE 13.8 As with many polyploid plants, this triploid orange daylily (Hemerocallis fulva) is particularly large and robust, and grows
      flowers with triple the number of petals of its diploid counterparts. (credit: Steve Karg)




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           13.2 • Chromosomal Basis of Inherited Disorders      355



Sex Chromosome Nondisjunction in Humans
Humans display dramatic deleterious effects with autosomal trisomies and monosomies. Therefore, it may seem
counterintuitive that human females and males can function normally, despite carrying different numbers of the X
chromosome. Rather than a gain or loss of autosomes, variations in the number of sex chromosomes occur with
relatively mild effects. In part, this happens because of the molecular process X inactivation. Early in development,
when female mammalian embryos consist of just a few thousand cells (relative to trillions in the newborn), one X
chromosome in each cell inactivates by tightly condensing into a quiescent (dormant) structure, or a Barr body. The
chance that an X chromosome (maternally or paternally derived) inactivates in each cell is random, but once this
occurs, all cells derived from that one will have the same inactive X chromosome or Barr body. By this process,
females compensate for their double genetic dose of X chromosome. In so-called “tortoiseshell” cats, we observe
embryonic X inactivation as color variegation (Figure 13.9). Females that are heterozygous for an X-linked coat color
gene will express one of two different coat colors over different regions of their body, corresponding to whichever X
chromosome inactivates in that region's embryonic cell progenitor.




FIGURE 13.9 In cats, the gene for coat color is located on the X chromosome. In female cats' embryonic development, one of the two X
chromosomes randomly inactivates in each cell, resulting in a tortoiseshell pattern if the cat has two different alleles for coat color. Male
cats, having only one X chromosome, never exhibit a tortoiseshell coat color. (credit: Michael Bodega)

An individual carrying an abnormal number of X chromosomes will inactivate all but one X chromosome in each of
her cells. However, even inactivated X chromosomes continue to express a few genes, and X chromosomes must
reactivate for the proper maturation of female ovaries. As a result, X-chromosomal abnormalities typically occur
with mild intellectual and physical disorders or disabilities, as well as sterility. If the X chromosome is absent
altogether, the individual will not develop in utero.

Scientists have identified and characterized several errors in sex chromosome number. Individuals with three X
chromosomes, triplo-X, are phenotypically female but express developmental delays and reduced fertility. The XXY
genotype, corresponding to one type of Klinefelter syndrome, corresponds to phenotypically male individuals with
small testes, enlarged breasts, and reduced body hair. More complex types of Klinefelter syndrome exist in which
the individual has as many as five X chromosomes. In all types, every X chromosome except one undergoes
inactivation to compensate for the excess genetic dosage. We see this as several Barr bodies in each cell nucleus.
Turner syndrome, characterized as an X0 genotype (i.e., only a single sex chromosome), corresponds to a
phenotypically female individual with short stature, webbed skin in the neck region, hearing and cardiac
impairments, and sterility.

Duplications and Deletions
In addition to losing or gaining an entire chromosome, a chromosomal segment may duplicate or lose itself.
Duplications and deletions often produce offspring that survive but exhibit abnormalities. Duplicated chromosomal
segments may fuse to existing chromosomes or may be free in the nucleus. Cri-du-chat (from the French for “cry of
the cat”) is a syndrome that occurs with nervous system abnormalities and identifiable physical features that result
from a deletion of most 5p (the small arm of chromosome 5) (Figure 13.10). Infants with this genotype emit a
356   13 • Modern Understandings of Inheritance



      characteristic high-pitched cry on which the disorder’s name is based.




      FIGURE 13.10 This figure shows an individual with cri-du-chat syndrome at two, four, nine, and 12 years of age. (credit: Paola Cerruti
      Mainardi)

      Chromosomal Structural Rearrangements
      Cytologists have characterized numerous structural rearrangements in chromosomes, but chromosome inversions
      and translocations are the most common. We can identify both during meiosis by the adaptive pairing of rearranged
      chromosomes with their former homologs to maintain appropriate gene alignment. If the genes on two homologs
      are not oriented correctly, a recombination event could result in losing genes from one chromosome and gaining
      genes on the other. This would produce aneuploid gametes.

      Chromosome Inversions
      A chromosome inversion is the detachment, 180° rotation, and reinsertion of part of a chromosome. Inversions
      may occur in nature as a result of mechanical shear, or from transposable elements' action (special DNA sequences
      capable of facilitating rearranging chromosome segments with the help of enzymes that cut and paste DNA
      sequences). Unless they disrupt a gene sequence, inversions only change gene orientation and are likely to have
      more mild effects than aneuploid errors. However, altered gene orientation can result in functional changes because
      regulators of gene expression could move out of position with respect to their targets, causing aberrant levels of
      gene products.

      An inversion can be pericentric and include the centromere, or paracentric and occur outside the centromere
      (Figure 13.11). A pericentric inversion that is asymmetric about the centromere can change the chromosome arms'
      relative lengths, making these inversions easily identifiable.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         13.2 • Chromosomal Basis of Inherited Disorders      357




FIGURE 13.11 Pericentric inversions include the centromere, and paracentric inversions do not. A pericentric inversion can change the
chromosome arms' relative lengths. A paracentric inversion cannot.

When one homologous chromosome undergoes an inversion but the other does not, the individual is an inversion
heterozygote. To maintain point-for-point synapsis during meiosis, one homolog must form a loop, and the other
homolog must mold around it. Although this topology can ensure that the genes correctly align, it also forces the
homologs to stretch and can occur with imprecise synapsis regions (Figure 13.12).




FIGURE 13.12 When one chromosome undergoes an inversion but the other does not, one chromosome must form an inverted loop to
retain point-for-point interaction during synapsis. This inversion pairing is essential to maintaining gene alignment during meiosis and to
allow for recombination.



        EVOLUTION CONNECTION

The Chromosome 18 Inversion
Not all chromosomes' structural rearrangements produce nonviable, impaired, or infertile individuals. In rare
instances, such a change can result in new species evolving. In fact, a pericentric inversion in chromosome 18
appears to have contributed to human evolution. This inversion is not present in our closest genetic relatives, the
chimpanzees. Humans and chimpanzees differ cytogenetically by pericentric inversions on several chromosomes
and by the fusion of two separate chromosomes in chimpanzees that correspond to chromosome two in humans.

Scientists believe the pericentric chromosome 18 inversion occurred in early humans following their divergence
from a common ancestor with chimpanzees approximately five million years ago. Researchers characterizing this
inversion have suggested that approximately 19,000 nucleotide bases were duplicated on 18p, and the duplicated
region inverted and reinserted on chromosome 18 of an ancestral human.
358   13 • Modern Understandings of Inheritance



      A comparison of human and chimpanzee genes in the region of this inversion indicates that two genes—ROCK1 and
      USP14—that are adjacent on chimpanzee chromosome 17 (which corresponds to human chromosome 18) are more
      distantly positioned on human chromosome 18. This suggests that one of the inversion breakpoints occurred
      between these two genes. Interestingly, humans and chimpanzees express USP14 at distinct levels in specific cell
      types, including cortical cells and fibroblasts. Perhaps the chromosome 18 inversion in an ancestral human
      repositioned specific genes and reset their expression levels in a useful way. Because both ROCK1 and USP14
      encode cellular enzymes, a change in their expression could alter cellular function. We do not know how this
      inversion contributed to hominid evolution, but it appears to be a significant factor in the divergence of humans from
                       1
      other primates.


      Translocations
      A translocation occurs when a chromosome segment dissociates and reattaches to a different, nonhomologous
      chromosome. Translocations can be benign or have devastating effects depending on how the positions of genes are
      altered with respect to regulatory sequences. Notably, specific translocations have occurred with several cancers
      and with schizophrenia. Reciprocal translocations result from exchanging chromosome segments between two
      nonhomologous chromosomes such that there is no genetic information gain or loss (Figure 13.13).




      FIGURE 13.13 A reciprocal translocation occurs when a DNA segment transfers from one chromosome to another, nonhomologous
      chromosome. (credit: modification of work by National Human Genome Research/USA)




      1 Violaine Goidts et al., “Segmental duplication associated with the human-specific inversion of chromosome 18: a further example of the
      impact of segmental duplications on karyotype and genome evolution in primates,” Human Genetics. 115 (2004):116-122




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              13 • Key Terms   359




Key Terms
aneuploid individual with an error in chromosome               completely separate and migrate to separate poles
   number; includes chromosome segment deletions               during the meiosis' first cell division
   and duplications                                        nonparental (recombinant) type progeny resulting
autosome any of the non-sex chromosomes                        from homologous recombination that exhibits a
centimorgan (cM) (also, map unit) relative distance            different allele combination compared with its
   that corresponds to a 0,01 recombination frequency          parents
Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance theory                   paracentric inversion that occurs outside the
   proposing that chromosomes are the genes'                   centromere
   vehicles and that their behavior during meiosis is      parental types progeny that exhibits the same allelic
   the physical basis of the inheritance patterns that         combination as its parents
   Mendel observed                                         pericentric inversion that involves the centromere
chromosome inversion detachment, 180° rotation,            polyploid individual with an incorrect number of
   and chromosome arm reinsertion                              chromosome sets
euploid individual with the appropriate number of          recombination frequency average number of
   chromosomes for their species                               crossovers between two alleles; observed as the
homologous recombination process by which                      number of nonparental types in a progeny's
   homologous chromosomes undergo reciprocal                   population
   physical exchanges at their arms, also crossing over    translocation process by which one chromosome
karyogram a karyotype's photographic image                     segment dissociates and reattaches to a different,
karyotype an individual's chromosome number and                nonhomologous chromosome
   appearance; includes the size, banding patterns,        trisomy otherwise diploid genotype in which one
   and centromere position                                     entire chromosome duplicates
monosomy otherwise diploid genotype in which one           X inactivation condensing X chromosomes into Barr
   chromosome is missing                                       bodies during embryonic development in females to
nondisjunction failure of synapsed homologs to                 compensate for the double genetic dose

Chapter Summary
13.1 Chromosomal Theory and Genetic                        13.2 Chromosomal Basis of Inherited
Linkage                                                    Disorders
Sutton and Boveri's Chromosomal Theory of                  The number, size, shape, and banding pattern of
Inheritance states that chromosomes are the vehicles       chromosomes make them easily identifiable in a
of genetic heredity. Neither Mendelian genetics nor        karyogram and allows for the assessment of many
gene linkage is perfectly accurate. Instead,               chromosomal abnormalities. Disorders in chromosome
chromosome behavior involves segregation,                  number, or aneuploidies, are typically lethal to the
independent assortment, and occasionally, linkage.         embryo, although a few trisomic genotypes are viable.
Sturtevant devised a method to assess recombination        Because of X inactivation, aberrations in sex
frequency and infer linked genes' relative positions and   chromosomes typically have milder phenotypic effects.
distances on a chromosome on the basis of the average      Aneuploidies also include instances in which a
number of crossovers in the intervening region             chromosome's segments duplicate or delete
between the genes. Sturtevant correctly presumed that      themselves. Inversion or translocation also may
genes are arranged in serial order on chromosomes          rearrange chromosome structures. Both of these
and that recombination between homologs can occur          aberrations can result in problematic phenotypic
anywhere on a chromosome with equal likelihood.            effects. Because they force chromosomes to assume
Whereas linkage causes alleles on the same                 unnatural topologies during meiosis, inversions and
chromosome to be inherited together, homologous            translocations often occur with reduced fertility
recombination biases alleles toward an independent         because of the likelihood of nondisjunction.
inheritance pattern.

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 13.3 In a test cross for two                        the predicted frequency of recombinant
      characteristics such as the one shown here, can            offspring be 60 percent? Why or why not?
360   13 • Review Questions



   2. Figure 13.4 Which of the following statements is                long/short aristae alleles will occur more
      true?                                                           frequently than recombination of the
        a. Recombination of the body color and red/                   alleles for wing length and body color.
            cinnabar eye alleles will occur more
            frequently than recombination of the             3. Figure 13.6 Which of the following statements
            alleles for wing length and aristae length.         about nondisjunction is true?
        b. Recombination of the body color and                    a. Nondisjunction only results in gametes
            aristae length alleles will occur more                    with n+1 or n–1 chromosomes.
            frequently than recombination of red/                 b. Nondisjunction occurring during meiosis II
            brown eye alleles and the aristae length                  results in 50 percent normal gametes.
            alleles.                                              c. Nondisjunction during meiosis I results in
         c. Recombination of the gray/black body                      50 percent normal gametes.
            color and long/short aristae alleles will not         d. Nondisjunction always results in four
            occur.                                                    different kinds of gametes.
        d. Recombination of the red/brown eye and


Review Questions
   4. X-linked recessive traits in humans (or in                  b. 13q12
      Drosophila) are observed ________.                          c. 12p13
        a. in more males than females                             d. 12q13
        b. in more females than males
        c. in males and females equally                      9. In agriculture, polyploid crops (like coffee,
        d. in different distributions depending on the          strawberries, or bananas) tend to produce
            trait                                               ________.
                                                                  a. more uniformity
   5. The first suggestion that chromosomes may                   b. more variety
      physically exchange segments came from the                  c. larger yields
      microscopic identification of ________.                     d. smaller yields
        a. synapsis
        b. sister chromatids                                10. Assume a pericentric inversion occurred in one
        c. chiasmata                                            of two homologs prior to meiosis. The other
        d. alleles                                              homolog remains normal. During meiosis, what
                                                                structure—if any—would these homologs
   6. Which recombination frequency corresponds to              assume in order to pair accurately along their
      independent assortment and the absence of                 lengths?
      linkage?                                                    a. V formation
         a. 0                                                     b. cruciform
         b. 0.25                                                   c. loop
         c. 0.50                                                  d. pairing would not be possible
         d. 0.75
                                                            11. The genotype XXY corresponds to
   7. Which recombination frequency corresponds to                a. Klinefelter syndrome
      perfect linkage and violates the law of                     b. Turner syndrome
      independent assortment?                                     c. Triplo-X
        a. 0                                                      d. Jacob syndrome
        b. 0.25
        c. 0.50                                             12. Abnormalities in the number of X chromosomes
        d. 0.75                                                 tends to have milder phenotypic effects than the
                                                                same abnormalities in autosomes because of
   8. Which of the following codes describes position           ________.
      12 on the long arm of chromosome 13?                        a. deletions
        a. 13p12                                                  b. nonhomologous recombination




Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              13 • Critical Thinking Questions   361



        c. synapsis                                              a.   centromere
        d. X inactivation                                        b.   chiasma
                                                                 c.   telomere
 13. By definition, a pericentric inversion includes the         d.   synapse
     ________.

Critical Thinking Questions
 14. Explain how the Chromosomal Theory of                 15. Using diagrams, illustrate how nondisjunction
     Inheritance helped to advance our                         can result in an aneuploid zygote.
     understanding of genetics.
362   13 • Critical Thinking Questions




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 14
DNA Structure and Function




FIGURE 14.1 Dolly the sheep was the first large mammal to be cloned.


CHAPTER OUTLINE
14.1 Historical Basis of Modern Understanding
14.2 DNA Structure and Sequencing
14.3 Basics of DNA Replication
14.4 DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
14.5 DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
14.6 DNA Repair


INTRODUCTION The three letters “DNA” have now become synonymous with crime solving and
genetic testing. DNA can be retrieved from hair, blood, or saliva. Each person’s DNA is unique, and
it is possible to detect differences between individuals within a species on the basis of these
unique features.

DNA analysis has many practical applications beyond forensics. In humans, DNA testing is applied
to numerous uses: determining paternity, tracing genealogy, identifying pathogens, archeological
research, tracing disease outbreaks, and studying human migration patterns. In the medical field,
DNA is used in diagnostics, new vaccine development, and cancer therapy. It is now possible to
determine predisposition to diseases by looking at genes.

Each human cell has 23 pairs of chromosomes: one set of chromosomes is inherited from the
female parent and the other set is inherited from the male parent. There is also a mitochondrial
genome, inherited exclusively from the female parent, which can be involved in inherited genetic
disorders. On each chromosome, there are thousands of genes that are responsible for
determining the genotype and phenotype of the individual. A gene is defined as a sequence of
DNA that codes for a functional product. The human haploid genome contains 3 billion base pairs
and has between 20,000 and 25,000 functional genes.
364   14 • DNA Structure and Function




      14.1 Historical Basis of Modern Understanding
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Explain transformation of DNA
         • Describe the key experiments that helped identify that DNA is the genetic material
         • State and explain Chargaff’s rules

      Our current understanding of DNA began with the discovery of nucleic acids followed by the
      development of the double-helix model. In the 1860s, Friedrich Miescher (Figure 14.2), a
      physician by profession, isolated phosphate-rich chemicals from white blood cells (leukocytes).
      He named these chemicals (which would eventually be known as DNA) nuclein because they were
      isolated from the nuclei of the cells.




                           FIGURE 14.2 Friedrich Miescher (1844–1895) discovered nucleic acids.


           LINK TO LEARNING
      To see Miescher conduct his experiment that led to his discovery of DNA and associated proteins
      in the nucleus, click through this review (https://openstax.org/l/miescher_levene).


      A half century later, in 1928, British bacteriologist Frederick Griffith reported the first
      demonstration of bacterial transformation—a process in which external DNA is taken up by a cell,
      thereby changing its morphology and physiology. Griffith conducted his experiments with
      Streptococcus pneumoniae, a bacterium that causes pneumonia. Griffith worked with two strains
      of this bacterium called rough (R) and smooth (S). (The two cell types were called “rough” and
      “smooth” after the appearance of their colonies grown on a nutrient agar plate.)

      The R strain is non-pathogenic (does not cause disease). The S strain is pathogenic (disease-
      causing), and has a capsule outside its cell wall. The capsule allows the cell to escape the immune
      responses of the host mouse.

      When Griffith injected the living S strain into mice, they died from pneumonia. In contrast, when
      Griffith injected the live R strain into mice, they survived. In another experiment, when he injected
      mice with the heat-killed S strain, they also survived. This experiment showed that the capsule
      alone was not the cause of death. In a third set of experiments, a mixture of live R strain and heat-
      killed S strain were injected into mice, and—to his surprise—the mice died. Upon isolating the live
      bacteria from the dead mouse, only the S strain of bacteria was recovered. When this isolated S
      strain was injected into fresh mice, the mice died. Griffith concluded that something had passed
      from the heat-killed S strain into the live R strain and transformed it into the pathogenic S strain.
      He called this the transforming principle (Figure 14.3). These experiments are now known as
      Griffith's transformation experiments.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         14.1 • Historical Basis of Modern Understanding         365




FIGURE 14.3 Two strains of S. pneumoniae were used in Griffith’s transformation experiments. The R strain is non-pathogenic, whereas the
S strain is pathogenic and causes death. When Griffith injected a mouse with the heat-killed S strain and a live R strain, the mouse died. The
S strain was recovered from the dead mouse. Griffith concluded that something had passed from the heat-killed S strain to the R strain,
transforming the R strain into the S strain in the process. Credit: Rao, A., Ryan, K. and Tag, A. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

Scientists Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty (1944) were interested in exploring this transforming
principle further. They isolated the S strain from the dead mice and isolated the proteins and nucleic acids (RNA and
DNA) as these were possible candidates for the molecule of heredity. They used enzymes that specifically degraded
each component and then used each mixture separately to transform the R strain. They found that when DNA was
degraded, the resulting mixture was no longer able to transform the bacteria, whereas all of the other combinations
were able to transform the bacteria. This led them to conclude that DNA was the transforming principle.



        CAREER CONNECTION

Forensic Scientist
Forensic Scientists used DNA analysis evidence for the first time to solve an immigration case. The story started with
a teenage boy returning to London from Ghana to be with his mother. Immigration authorities at the airport were
suspicious of him, thinking that he was traveling on a forged passport. After much persuasion, he was allowed to go
live with his mother, but the immigration authorities did not drop the case against him. All types of evidence,
including photographs, were provided to the authorities, but deportation proceedings were started nevertheless.
Around the same time, Dr. Alec Jeffreys of Leicester University in the United Kingdom had invented a technique
known as DNA fingerprinting. The immigration authorities approached Dr. Jeffreys for help. He took DNA samples
from the mother and three of her children, as well as an unrelated mother, and compared the samples with the boy’s
DNA. Because the biological father was not in the picture, DNA from the three children was compared with the boy’s
DNA. He found a match in the boy’s DNA for both the mother and his three siblings. He concluded that the boy was
indeed the mother’s son.

Forensic scientists analyze many items, including documents, handwriting, firearms, and biological samples. They
analyze the DNA content of hair, semen, saliva, and blood, and compare it with a database of DNA profiles of known
criminals. Analysis includes DNA isolation, sequencing, and sequence analysis. Forensic scientists are expected to
appear at court hearings to present their findings. They are usually employed in crime labs of city and state
government agencies. Geneticists experimenting with DNA techniques also work for scientific and research
366   14 • DNA Structure and Function



      organizations, pharmaceutical industries, and college and university labs. Students wishing to pursue a career as a
      forensic scientist should have at least a bachelor's degree in chemistry, biology, or physics, and preferably some
      experience working in a laboratory.


      Although the experiments of Avery, McCarty and McLeod had demonstrated that DNA was the informational
      component transferred during transformation, DNA was still considered to be too simple a molecule to carry
      biological information. Proteins, with their 20 different amino acids, were regarded as more likely candidates. The
      decisive experiment, conducted by Martha Chase and Alfred Hershey in 1952, provided confirmatory evidence that
      DNA was indeed the genetic material and not proteins. Chase and Hershey were studying a bacteriophage—a virus
      that infects bacteria. Viruses typically have a simple structure: a protein coat, called the capsid, and a nucleic acid
      core that contains the genetic material (either DNA or RNA). The bacteriophage infects the host bacterial cell by
      attaching to its surface, and then it injects its nucleic acids inside the cell. The phage DNA makes multiple copies of
      itself using the host machinery, and eventually the host cell bursts, releasing a large number of bacteriophages.
      Hershey and Chase selected radioactive elements that would specifically distinguish the protein from the DNA in
      infected cells. They labeled one batch of phage with radioactive sulfur, 35S, to label the protein coat. Another batch
      of phage were labeled with radioactive phosphorus, 32P. Because phosphorous is found in DNA, but not protein, the
      DNA and not the protein would be tagged with radioactive phosphorus. Likewise, sulfur is absent from DNA, but
      present in several amino acids such as methionine and cysteine.

      Each batch of phage was allowed to infect the cells separately. After infection, the phage bacterial suspension was
      put in a blender, which caused the phage coat to detach from the host cell. Cells exposed long enough for infection
      to occur were then examined to see which of the two radioactive molecules had entered the cell. The phage and
      bacterial suspension was spun down in a centrifuge. The heavier bacterial cells settled down and formed a pellet,
      whereas the lighter phage particles stayed in the supernatant. In the tube that contained phage labeled with 35S,
      the supernatant contained the radioactively labeled phage, whereas no radioactivity was detected in the pellet. In
      the tube that contained the phage labeled with 32P, the radioactivity was detected in the pellet that contained the
      heavier bacterial cells, and no radioactivity was detected in the supernatant. Hershey and Chase concluded that it
      was the phage DNA that was injected into the cell and carried information to produce more phage particles, thus
      providing evidence that DNA was the genetic material and not proteins (Figure 14.4).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 14.2 • DNA Structure and Sequencing       367




FIGURE 14.4 In Hershey and Chase's experiments, bacteria were infected with phage radiolabeled with either 35S, which labels protein, or
32P, which labels DNA. Only 32P entered the bacterial cells, indicating that DNA is the genetic material.


Around this same time, Austrian biochemist Erwin Chargaff examined the content of DNA in different species and
found that the amounts of adenine, thymine, guanine, and cytosine were not found in equal quantities, and that
relative concentrations of the four nucleotide bases varied from species to species, but not within tissues of the
same individual or between individuals of the same species. He also discovered something unexpected: That the
amount of adenine equaled the amount of thymine, and the amount of cytosine equaled the amount of guanine (that
is, A = T and G = C). Different species had equal amounts of purines (A+G) and pyrimidines (T + C), but different
ratios of A+T to G+C. These observations became known as Chargaff’s rules. Chargaff's findings proved immensely
useful when Watson and Crick were getting ready to propose their DNA double helix model! You can see after
reading the past few pages how science builds upon previous discoveries, sometimes in a slow and laborious
process.

14.2 DNA Structure and Sequencing
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Describe the structure of DNA
   • Explain the Sanger method of DNA sequencing
   • Discuss the similarities and differences between eukaryotic and prokaryotic DNA

The building blocks of DNA are nucleotides. The important components of the nucleotide are a nitrogenous
(nitrogen-bearing) base, a 5-carbon sugar (pentose), and a phosphate group (Figure 14.5). The nucleotide is named
depending on the nitrogenous base. The nitrogenous base can be a purine such as adenine (A) and guanine (G), or a
pyrimidine such as cytosine (C) and thymine (T).
368   14 • DNA Structure and Function




              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 14.5 The purines have a double ring structure with a six-membered ring fused to a five-membered ring. Pyrimidines are smaller in
      size; they have a single six-membered ring structure.

      The images above illustrate the five bases of DNA and RNA. Examine the images and explain why these are called
      “nitrogenous bases.” How are the purines different from the pyrimidines? How is one purine or pyrimidine different
      from another, e.g., adenine from guanine? How is a nucleoside different from a nucleotide?


      The purines have a double ring structure with a six-membered ring fused to a five-membered ring. Pyrimidines are
      smaller in size; they have a single six-membered ring structure.

      The sugar is deoxyribose in DNA and ribose in RNA. The carbon atoms of the five-carbon sugar are numbered 1', 2',
      3', 4', and 5' (1' is read as “one prime”). The phosphate, which makes DNA and RNA acidic, is connected to the 5'
      carbon of the sugar by the formation of an ester linkage between phosphoric acid and the 5'-OH group (an ester is
      an acid + an alcohol). In DNA nucleotides, the 3' carbon of the sugar deoxyribose is attached to a hydroxyl (OH)
      group. In RNA nucleotides, the 2' carbon of the sugar ribose also contains a hydroxyl group. The base is attached to
      the 1'carbon of the sugar.

      The nucleotides combine with each other to produce phosphodiester bonds. The phosphate residue attached to the
      5' carbon of the sugar of one nucleotide forms a second ester linkage with the hydroxyl group of the 3' carbon of the
      sugar of the next nucleotide, thereby forming a 5'-3' phosphodiester bond. In a polynucleotide, one end of the chain
      has a free 5' phosphate, and the other end has a free 3'-OH. These are called the 5' and 3' ends of the chain. A base
      attached to a five-carbon sugar represents a nucleoside. A nucleotide is composed of one, two, or three phosphate
      groups attached to a nucleoside.

      In the 1950s, Francis Crick and James Watson worked together to determine the structure of DNA at the University
      of Cambridge, England. Other scientists like Linus Pauling and Maurice Wilkins were also actively exploring this field.
      Pauling previously had discovered the secondary structure of proteins using X-ray crystallography. In Wilkins’ lab,
      researcher Rosalind Franklin was using X-ray diffraction methods to understand the structure of DNA. Watson and
      Crick were able to piece together the puzzle of the DNA molecule on the basis of Franklin's data because Crick had
      also studied X-ray diffraction (Figure 14.6). In 1962, James Watson, Francis Crick, and Maurice Wilkins were
      awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine. Unfortunately, by then Franklin had died, and Nobel prizes are not awarded
      posthumously.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 14.2 • DNA Structure and Sequencing   369




                 FIGURE 14.6 The X-ray diffraction pattern of DNA, which helped to elucidate its double-helix structure.

Watson and Crick proposed that DNA is made up of two strands that are twisted around each other to form a right-
handed helix. Base pairing takes place between a purine and pyrimidine on opposite strands, so that A pairs with T,
and G pairs with C (suggested by Chargaff's Rules). Thus, adenine and thymine are complementary base pairs, and
cytosine and guanine are also complementary base pairs. The base pairs are stabilized by hydrogen bonds: adenine
and thymine form two hydrogen bonds and cytosine and guanine form three hydrogen bonds. The two strands are
anti-parallel in nature; that is, the 3' end of one strand faces the 5' end of the other strand. The sugar and phosphate
of the nucleotides form the backbone of the structure, whereas the nitrogenous bases are stacked inside, like the
rungs of a ladder. Each base pair is separated from the next base pair by a distance of 0.34 nm, and each turn of the
helix measures 3.4 nm. Therefore, 10 base pairs are present per turn of the helix. The diameter of the DNA double-
helix is 2 nm, and it is uniform throughout. Only the pairing between a purine and pyrimidine and the antiparallel
orientation of the two DNA strands can explain the uniform diameter. The twisting of the two strands around each
other results in the formation of uniformly spaced major and minor grooves (Figure 14.7).




FIGURE 14.7 DNA has (a) a double helix structure and (b) phosphodiester bonds; the dotted lines between Thymine and Adenine and
Guanine and Cytosine represent hydrogen bonds. The (c) major and minor grooves are binding sites for DNA binding proteins during
processes such as transcription (the copying of RNA from DNA) and replication.

DNA Sequencing Techniques
Until the 1990s, the sequencing of DNA (reading the sequence of DNA) was a relatively expensive and long process.
Using radiolabeled nucleotides also compounded the problem through safety concerns. With currently available
technology and automated machines, the process is cheaper, safer, and can be completed in a matter of hours. Fred
Sanger developed the sequencing method used for the human genome sequencing project, which is widely used
today (Figure 14.8).
370   14 • DNA Structure and Function




           LINK TO LEARNING
      Visit this site (https://openstax.org/l/DNA_sequencing) to watch a video explaining the DNA sequence-reading
      technique that resulted from Sanger’s work.


      The sequencing method is known as the dideoxy chain termination method. The method is based on the use of
      chain terminators, the dideoxynucleotides (ddNTPs). The ddNTPs differ from the deoxynucleotides by the lack of a
      free 3' OH group on the five-carbon sugar. If a ddNTP is added to a growing DNA strand, the chain cannot be
      extended any further because the free 3' OH group needed to add another nucleotide is not available. By using a
      predetermined ratio of deoxynucleotides to dideoxynucleotides, it is possible to generate DNA fragments of
      different sizes.




      FIGURE 14.8 In Frederick Sanger's dideoxy chain termination method, dye-labeled dideoxynucleotides are used to generate DNA
      fragments that terminate at different points. The DNA is separated by capillary electrophoresis on the basis of size, and from the order of
      fragments formed, the DNA sequence can be read. The DNA sequence readout is shown on an electropherogram that is generated by a
      laser scanner.

      The DNA sample to be sequenced is denatured (separated into two strands by heating it to high temperatures). The
      DNA is divided into four tubes in which a primer, DNA polymerase, and all four nucleoside triphosphates (A, T, G, and
      C) are added. In addition, limited quantities of one of the four dideoxynucleoside triphosphates (ddCTP, ddATP,
      ddGTP, and ddTTP) are added to each tube respectively. The tubes are labeled as A, T, G, and C according to the
      ddNTP added. For detection purposes, each of the four dideoxynucleotides carries a different fluorescent label.
      Chain elongation continues until a fluorescent dideoxy nucleotide is incorporated, after which no further elongation
      takes place. After the reaction is over, electrophoresis is performed. Even a difference in length of a single base can
      be detected. The sequence is read from a laser scanner that detects the fluorescent marker of each fragment. For
      his work on DNA sequencing, Sanger received a Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1980.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      Sanger’s genome sequencing has led to a race to sequence human genomes at rapid speed and low cost. Learn
      more by viewing the animation here (https://openstax.org/l/DNA_and_genomes).


      Gel electrophoresis is a technique used to separate DNA fragments of different sizes. Usually the gel is made of a
      chemical called agarose (a polysaccharide polymer extracted from seaweed that is high in galactose residues).
      Agarose powder is added to a buffer and heated. After cooling, the gel solution is poured into a casting tray. Once
      the gel has solidified, the DNA is loaded on the gel and electric current is applied. The DNA has a net negative charge
      and moves from the negative electrode toward the positive electrode. The electric current is applied for sufficient
      time to let the DNA separate according to size; the smallest fragments will be farthest from the well (where the DNA
      was loaded), and the heavier molecular weight fragments will be closest to the well. Once the DNA is separated, the
      gel is stained with a DNA-specific dye for viewing it (Figure 14.9).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               14.2 • DNA Structure and Sequencing   371




FIGURE 14.9 DNA can be separated on the basis of size using gel electrophoresis. (credit: James Jacob, Tompkins Cortland Community
College)



        EVOLUTION CONNECTION

Neanderthal Genome: How Are We Related?
                                                                                                                              1
The first draft sequence of the Neanderthal genome was recently published by Richard E. Green et al. in 2010.
Neanderthals are the closest ancestors of present-day humans. They were known to have lived in Europe and
Western Asia (and now, perhaps, in Northern Africa) before they disappeared from fossil records approximately
30,000 years ago. Green’s team studied almost 40,000-year-old fossil remains that were selected from sites across
the world. Extremely sophisticated means of sample preparation and DNA sequencing were employed because of
the fragile nature of the bones and heavy microbial contamination. In their study, the scientists were able to
sequence some four billion base pairs. The Neanderthal sequence was compared with that of present-day humans
from across the world. After comparing the sequences, the researchers found that the Neanderthal genome had 2 to
3 percent greater similarity to people living outside Africa than to people in Africa. While current theories have
suggested that all present-day humans can be traced to a small ancestral population in Africa, the data from the
Neanderthal genome suggest some interbreeding between Neanderthals and early modern humans.

Green and his colleagues also discovered DNA segments among people in Europe and Asia that are more similar to
Neanderthal sequences than to other contemporary human sequences. Another interesting observation was that
Neanderthals are as closely related to people from Papua New Guinea as to those from China or France. This is
surprising because Neanderthal fossil remains have been located only in Europe and West Asia. Most likely, genetic
exchange took place between Neanderthals and modern humans as modern humans emerged out of Africa, before
the divergence of Europeans, East Asians, and Papua New Guineans.

Several genes seem to have undergone changes from Neanderthals during the evolution of present-day humans.
These genes are involved in cranial structure, metabolism, skin morphology, and cognitive development. One of the
genes that is of particular interest is RUNX2, which is different in modern day humans and Neanderthals. This gene
is responsible for the prominent frontal bone, bell-shaped rib cage, and dental differences seen in Neanderthals. It
is speculated that an evolutionary change in RUNX2 was important in the origin of modern-day humans, and this
affected the cranium and the upper body.


     LINK TO LEARNING
Watch Svante Pääbo’s talk (https://openstax.org/l/neanderthal) explaining the Neanderthal genome research at the
2011 annual TED (Technology, Entertainment, Design) conference.


DNA Packaging in Cells
Prokaryotes are much simpler than eukaryotes in many of their features (Figure 14.10). Most prokaryotes contain a

1 Richard E. Green et al., “A Draft Sequence of the Neandertal Genome,” Science 328 (2010): 710-22.
372   14 • DNA Structure and Function



      single, circular chromosome that is found in an area of the cytoplasm called the nucleoid region.



              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 14.10 A eukaryote contains a well-defined nucleus, whereas in prokaryotes, the chromosome lies in the cytoplasm in an area
      called the nucleoid.

      In eukaryotic cells, DNA and RNA synthesis occur in a separate compartment from protein synthesis. In prokaryotic
      cells, both processes occur together. What advantages might there be to separating the processes? What
      advantages might there be to having them occur together?


      The size of the genome in one of the most well-studied prokaryotes, E.coli, is 4.6 million base pairs (approximately
      1.1 mm, if cut and stretched out). So how does this fit inside a small bacterial cell? The DNA is twisted by what is
      known as supercoiling. Supercoiling suggests that DNA is either “under-wound” (less than one turn of the helix per
      10 base pairs) or “over-wound” (more than 1 turn per 10 base pairs) from its normal relaxed state. Some proteins
      are known to be involved in the supercoiling; other proteins and enzymes such as DNA gyrase help in maintaining
      the supercoiled structure.

      Eukaryotes, whose chromosomes each consist of a linear DNA molecule, employ a different type of packing strategy
      to fit their DNA inside the nucleus (Figure 14.11). At the most basic level, DNA is wrapped around proteins known as
      histones to form structures called nucleosomes. The histones are evolutionarily conserved proteins that are rich in
      basic amino acids and form an octamer composed of two molecules of each of four different histones. Their
      composition and properties are important to understanding gene expression, and were partially uncovered based on
      research by Marie M. Daly and Alfred E. Mirsky in the early 1950s. The DNA (remember, it is negatively charged
      because of the phosphate groups) is wrapped tightly around the histone core. This nucleosome is linked to the next
      one with the help of a linker DNA. This is also known as the “beads on a string” structure. With the help of a fifth
      histone, a string of nucleosomes is further compacted into a 30-nm fiber, which is the diameter of the structure.
      Metaphase chromosomes are even further condensed by association with scaffolding proteins. At the metaphase
      stage, the chromosomes are at their most compact, approximately 700 nm in width.

      In interphase, eukaryotic chromosomes have two distinct regions that can be distinguished by staining. The tightly
      packaged region is known as heterochromatin, and the less dense region is known as euchromatin.
      Heterochromatin usually contains genes that are not expressed, and is found in the regions of the centromere and
      telomeres. The euchromatin usually contains genes that are transcribed, with DNA packaged around nucleosomes
      but not further compacted.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                14.3 • Basics of DNA Replication   373




                      FIGURE 14.11 These figures illustrate the compaction of the eukaryotic chromosome.

14.3 Basics of DNA Replication
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Explain how the structure of DNA reveals the replication process
   • Describe the Meselson and Stahl experiments

The elucidation of the structure of the double helix provided a hint as to how DNA divides and makes copies of itself.
In their 1953 paper, Watson and Crick penned an incredible understatement: "It has not escaped our notice that the
specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material."
With specific base pairs, the sequence of one DNA strand can be predicted from its complement. The double-helix
model suggests that the two strands of the double helix separate during replication, and each strand serves as a
template from which the new complementary strand is copied. What was not clear was how the replication took
place. There were three models suggested (Figure 14.12): conservative, semi-conservative, and dispersive.
374   14 • DNA Structure and Function




      FIGURE 14.12 The three suggested models of DNA replication. Gray indicates the original DNA strands, and blue indicates newly
      synthesized DNA.

      In conservative replication, the parental DNA remains together, and the newly formed daughter strands are
      together. The semi-conservative method suggests that each of the two parental DNA strands acts as a template for
      new DNA to be synthesized; after replication, each double-stranded DNA includes one parental or “old” strand and
      one “new” strand. In the dispersive model, both copies of DNA have double-stranded segments of parental DNA
      and newly synthesized DNA interspersed.

      Meselson and Stahl were interested in understanding how DNA replicates. They grew E. coli for several generations
      in a medium containing a “heavy” isotope of nitrogen (15N), which gets incorporated into nitrogenous bases, and
      eventually into the DNA (Figure 14.13).




      FIGURE 14.13 Meselson and Stahl experimented with E. coli grown first in heavy nitrogen (15N) then in 14N. DNA grown in 15N (red band) is
      heavier than DNA grown in 14N (orange band), and sediments to a lower level in cesium chloride solution in an ultracentrifuge. When DNA
      grown in 15N is switched to media containing 14N, after one round of cell division the DNA sediments halfway between the 15N and 14N
      levels, indicating that it now contains fifty percent 14N. In subsequent cell divisions, an increasing amount of DNA contains 14N only. These
      data support the semi-conservative replication model. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     14.4 • DNA Replication in Prokaryotes   375



The E. coli culture was then placed into medium containing 14N and allowed to grow for several generations. After
each of the first few generations, the cells were harvested and the DNA was isolated, then centrifuged at high
speeds in an ultracentrifuge. During the centrifugation, the DNA was loaded into a gradient (typically a solution of
salt such as cesium chloride or sucrose) and spun at high speeds of 50,000 to 60,000 rpm. Under these
circumstances, the DNA will form a band according to its buoyant density: the density within the gradient at which it
floats. DNA grown in 15N will form a band at a higher density position (i.e., farther down the centrifuge tube) than
that grown in 14N. Meselson and Stahl noted that after one generation of growth in 14N after they had been shifted
from 15N, the single band observed was intermediate in position in between DNA of cells grown exclusively in 15N
and 14N. This suggested either a semi-conservative or dispersive mode of replication. The DNA harvested from cells
grown for two generations in 14N formed two bands: one DNA band was at the intermediate position between 15N
and 14N, and the other corresponded to the band of 14N DNA. These results could only be explained if DNA
replicates in a semi-conservative manner. And for this reason, therefore, the other two models were ruled out.

During DNA replication, each of the two strands that make up the double helix serves as a template from which new
strands are copied. The new strands will be complementary to the parental or “old” strands. When two daughter
DNA copies are formed, they have the same sequence and are divided equally into the two daughter cells.

    LINK TO LEARNING
View this video (https://openstax.org/l/DNA_replicatio2) on DNA replication.


14.4 DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Explain the process of DNA replication in prokaryotes
   • Discuss the role of different enzymes and proteins in supporting this process

DNA replication has been well studied in prokaryotes primarily because of the small size of the genome and because
of the large variety of mutants that are available. E. coli has 4.6 million base pairs in a single circular chromosome
and all of it gets replicated in approximately 42 minutes, starting from a single site along the chromosome and
proceeding around the circle in both directions. This means that approximately 1000 nucleotides are added per
second. Thus, the process is quite rapid and occurs without many mistakes.

DNA replication employs a large number of structural proteins and enzymes, each of which plays a critical role
during the process. One of the key players is the enzyme DNA polymerase, also known as DNA pol, which adds
nucleotides one-by-one to the growing DNA chain that is complementary to the template strand. The addition of
nucleotides requires energy; this energy is obtained from the nucleoside triphosphates dATP, dGTP, dTTP and dCTP.
Like ATP, the other NTPs (nucleoside triphosphates) are high-energy molecules that can serve both as the source of
DNA nucleotides and the source of energy to drive the polymerization. When the bond between the phosphates is
“broken,” the energy released is used to form the phosphodiester bond between the incoming nucleotide and the
growing chain. In prokaryotes, three main types of polymerases are known: DNA pol I, DNA pol II, and DNA pol III.
It is now known that DNA pol III is the enzyme required for DNA synthesis; DNA pol I is an important accessory
enzyme in DNA replication, and along with DNA pol II, is primarily required for repair.

How does the replication machinery know where to begin? It turns out that there are specific nucleotide sequences
called origins of replication where replication begins. In E. coli, which has a single origin of replication on its one
chromosome (as do most prokaryotes), this origin of replication is approximately 245 base pairs long and is rich in
AT sequences. The origin of replication is recognized by certain proteins that bind to this site. An enzyme called
helicase unwinds the DNA by breaking the hydrogen bonds between the nitrogenous base pairs. ATP hydrolysis is
required for this process. As the DNA opens up, Y-shaped structures called replication forks are formed. Two
replication forks are formed at the origin of replication and these get extended bi-directionally as replication
proceeds. Single-strand binding proteins coat the single strands of DNA near the replication fork to prevent the
single-stranded DNA from winding back into a double helix.

DNA polymerase has two important restrictions: it is able to add nucleotides only in the 5' to 3' direction (a new DNA
376   14 • DNA Structure and Function



      strand can be only extended in this direction). It also requires a free 3'-OH group to which it can add nucleotides by
      forming a phosphodiester bond between the 3'-OH end and the 5' phosphate of the next nucleotide. This essentially
      means that it cannot add nucleotides if a free 3'-OH group is not available. Then how does it add the first
      nucleotide? The problem is solved with the help of a primer that provides the free 3'-OH end. Another enzyme, RNA
      primase, synthesizes an RNA segment that is about five to ten nucleotides long and complementary to the template
      DNA. Because this sequence primes the DNA synthesis, it is appropriately called the primer. DNA polymerase can
      now extend this RNA primer, adding nucleotides one-by-one that are complementary to the template strand (Figure
      14.14).



              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 14.14 First Components of DNA Replication. As DNA replication begins, DNA Helicase, a large enzyme, separates the two strands
      of DNA so that they can act as templates for replication. Single-strand binding proteins bind to each strand to stabilize and prevent them
      from reforming the double helix. Primase, an RNA polymerase, binds to the single stranded DNA and synthesizes a short RNA primer in the
      5’ to 3’ direction that is antiparallel to the parental strand. This RNA primer allows for DNA polymerase to begin replicating the DNA.
      Topoisomerase binds to the double helix upstream of the replication fork to prevent additional coiling by making small cuts in one of the
      DNA strands. Credit: Rao, A., Ryan, K. Fletcher, S. and Tag, A. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

      Question: You isolate a cell strain in which the joining of Okazaki fragments is impaired and suspect that a mutation
      has occurred in an enzyme found at the replication fork. Which enzyme is most likely to be mutated?


      The replication fork moves at the rate of 1000 nucleotides per second. Topoisomerase prevents the over-winding of
      the DNA double helix ahead of the replication fork as the DNA is opening up; it does so by causing temporary nicks
      in the DNA helix and then resealing it. Because DNA polymerase can only extend in the 5' to 3' direction, and
      because the DNA double helix is antiparallel, there is a slight problem at the replication fork. The two template DNA
      strands have opposing orientations: one strand is in the 5' to 3' direction and the other is oriented in the 3' to 5'
      direction. Only one new DNA strand, the one that is complementary to the 3' to 5' parental DNA strand, can be
      synthesized continuously towards the replication fork. This continuously synthesized strand is known as the leading
      strand. The other strand, complementary to the 5' to 3' parental DNA, is extended away from the replication fork, in
      small fragments known as Okazaki fragments, each requiring a primer to start the synthesis. New primer segments
      are laid down in the direction of the replication fork, but each pointing away from it. (Okazaki fragments are named
      after the Japanese scientist who first discovered them. The strand with the Okazaki fragments is known as the
      lagging strand.)

      The leading strand can be extended from a single primer, whereas the lagging strand needs a new primer for each of
      the short Okazaki fragments. The overall direction of the lagging strand will be 3' to 5', and that of the leading strand


      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  14.4 • DNA Replication in Prokaryotes   377



5' to 3'. A protein called the sliding clamp holds the DNA polymerase in place as it continues to add nucleotides.
The sliding clamp is a ring-shaped protein that binds to the DNA and holds the polymerase in place. As synthesis
proceeds, the RNA primers are replaced by DNA. The primers are removed by the exonuclease activity of DNA pol I,
which uses DNA behind the RNA as its own primer and fills in the gaps left by removal of the RNA nucleotides by the
addition of DNA nucleotides. The nicks that remain between the newly synthesized DNA (that replaced the RNA
primer) and the previously synthesized DNA are sealed by the enzyme DNA ligase, which catalyzes the formation of
phosphodiester linkages between the 3'-OH end of one nucleotide and the 5' phosphate end of the other fragment.

Once the chromosome has been completely replicated, the two DNA copies move into two different cells during cell
division.

The process of DNA replication can be summarized as follows:

 1.   DNA unwinds at the origin of replication.
 2.   Helicase opens up the DNA-forming replication forks; these are extended bidirectionally.
 3.   Single-strand binding proteins coat the DNA around the replication fork to prevent rewinding of the DNA.
 4.   Topoisomerase binds at the region ahead of the replication fork to prevent supercoiling.
 5.   Primase synthesizes RNA primers complementary to the DNA strand.
 6.   DNA polymerase III starts adding nucleotides to the 3'-OH end of the primer.
 7.   Elongation of both the lagging and the leading strand continues.
 8.   RNA primers are removed by exonuclease activity.
 9.   Gaps are filled by DNA pol I by adding dNTPs.
10.   The gap between the two DNA fragments is sealed by DNA ligase, which helps in the formation of
      phosphodiester bonds.


Table 14.1 summarizes the enzymes involved in prokaryotic DNA replication and the functions of each.

                             Prokaryotic DNA Replication: Enzymes and Their Function

          Enzyme/protein                                         Specific Function

 DNA pol I                        Removes RNA primer and replaces it with newly synthesized DNA

 DNA pol III                      Main enzyme that adds nucleotides in the 5'-3' direction

                                  Opens the DNA helix by breaking hydrogen bonds between the nitrogenous
 Helicase
                                  bases

                                  Seals the gaps between the Okazaki fragments to create one continuous DNA
 Ligase
                                  strand

 Primase                          Synthesizes RNA primers needed to start replication

 Sliding Clamp                    Helps to hold the DNA polymerase in place when nucleotides are being added

                                  Helps relieve the strain on DNA when unwinding by causing breaks, and then
 Topoisomerase
                                  resealing the DNA

 Single-strand binding
                                  Binds to single-stranded DNA to prevent DNA from rewinding back.
 proteins (SSB)

TABLE 14.1
378   14 • DNA Structure and Function




           LINK TO LEARNING
      Review the full process of DNA replication here (https://openstax.org/l/replication_DNA).


      14.5 DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Discuss the similarities and differences between DNA replication in eukaryotes and prokaryotes
         • State the role of telomerase in DNA replication

      Eukaryotic genomes are much more complex and larger in size than prokaryotic genomes. Eukaryotes also have a
      number of different linear chromosomes. The human genome has 3 billion base pairs per haploid set of
      chromosomes, and 6 billion base pairs are replicated during the S phase of the cell cycle. There are multiple origins
      of replication on each eukaryotic chromosome; humans can have up to 100,000 origins of replication across the
      genome. The rate of replication is approximately 100 nucleotides per second, much slower than prokaryotic
      replication. In yeast, which is a eukaryote, special sequences known as autonomously replicating sequences (ARS)
      are found on the chromosomes. These are equivalent to the origin of replication in E. coli.

      The number of DNA polymerases in eukaryotes is much more than in prokaryotes: 14 are known, of which five are
      known to have major roles during replication and have been well studied. They are known as pol α, pol β, pol γ, pol
      δ, and pol ε.

      The essential steps of replication are the same as in prokaryotes. Before replication can start, the DNA has to be
      made available as a template. Eukaryotic DNA is bound to basic proteins known as histones to form structures
      called nucleosomes. Histones must be removed and then replaced during the replication process, which helps to
      account for the lower replication rate in eukaryotes. The chromatin (the complex between DNA and proteins) may
      undergo some chemical modifications, so that the DNA may be able to slide off the proteins or be accessible to the
      enzymes of the DNA replication machinery. At the origin of replication, a pre-replication complex is made with other
      initiator proteins. Helicase and other proteins are then recruited to start the replication process (Table 14.2).

                                        Difference between Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Replication

                                        Property              Prokaryotes              Eukaryotes

                              Origin of replication       Single                Multiple

                              Rate of replication         1000 nucleotides/s    50 to 100 nucleotides/s

                              DNA polymerase types        5                     14

                              Telomerase                  Not present           Present

                              RNA primer removal          DNA pol I             RNase H

                              Strand elongation           DNA pol III           Pol α, pol δ, pol ε

                              Sliding clamp               Sliding clamp         PCNA

                            TABLE 14.2

      A helicase using the energy from ATP hydrolysis opens up the DNA helix. Replication forks are formed at each
      replication origin as the DNA unwinds. The opening of the double helix causes over-winding, or supercoiling, in the
      DNA ahead of the replication fork. These are resolved with the action of topoisomerases. Primers are formed by the
      enzyme primase, and using the primer, DNA pol can start synthesis. Three major DNA polymerases are then



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   14.5 • DNA Replication in Eukaryotes   379



involved: α, δ and ε. DNA pol α adds a short (20 to 30 nucleotides) DNA fragment to the RNA primer on both
strands, and then hands off to a second polymerase. While the leading strand is continuously synthesized by the
enzyme pol ε, the lagging strand is synthesized by pol δ. A sliding clamp protein known as PCNA (proliferating cell
nuclear antigen) holds the DNA pol in place so that it does not slide off the DNA. As pol δ runs into the primer RNA
on the lagging strand, it displaces it from the DNA template. The displaced primer RNA is then removed by RNase H
(AKA flap endonuclease) and replaced with DNA nucleotides. The Okazaki fragments in the lagging strand are
joined after the replacement of the RNA primers with DNA. The gaps that remain are sealed by DNA ligase, which
forms the phosphodiester bond.

Telomere replication
Unlike prokaryotic chromosomes, eukaryotic chromosomes are linear. As you’ve learned, the enzyme DNA pol can
add nucleotides only in the 5' to 3' direction. In the leading strand, synthesis continues until the end of the
chromosome is reached. On the lagging strand, DNA is synthesized in short stretches, each of which is initiated by a
separate primer. When the replication fork reaches the end of the linear chromosome, there is no way to replace the
primer on the 5’ end of the lagging strand. The DNA at the ends of the chromosome thus remains unpaired, and over
time these ends, called telomeres, may get progressively shorter as cells continue to divide.

Telomeres comprise repetitive sequences that code for no particular gene. In humans, a six-base-pair sequence,
TTAGGG, is repeated 100 to 1000 times in the telomere regions. In a way, these telomeres protect the genes from
getting deleted as cells continue to divide. The telomeres are added to the ends of chromosomes by a separate
enzyme, telomerase (Figure 14.16), whose discovery helped in the understanding of how these repetitive
chromosome ends are maintained. The telomerase enzyme contains a catalytic part and a built-in RNA template. It
attaches to the end of the chromosome, and DNA nucleotides complementary to the RNA template are added on the
3' end of the DNA strand. Once the 3' end of the lagging strand template is sufficiently elongated, DNA polymerase
can add the nucleotides complementary to the ends of the chromosomes. Thus, the ends of the chromosomes are
replicated.
380   14 • DNA Structure and Function




      FIGURE 14.15 The ends of linear chromosomes are maintained by the action of the telomerase enzyme. Credit: Rao, A. and Fletcher, S.
      Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

      Telomerase is typically active in germ cells and adult stem cells. It is not active in adult somatic cells. For their
      discovery of telomerase and its action, Elizabeth Blackburn, Carol W. Greider, and Jack W. Szostak (Figure 14.16)
      received the Nobel Prize for Medicine and Physiology in 2009. Later research using HeLa cells (obtained from
      Henrietta Lacks) confirmed that telomerase is present in human cells. And in 2001, researchers including Diane L.
      Wright found that telomerase is necessary for cells in human embryos to rapidly proliferate.




      FIGURE 14.16 Elizabeth Blackburn, 2009 Nobel Laureate, is one of the scientists who discovered how telomerase works. (credit: US
      Embassy Sweden)



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      14.6 • DNA Repair    381



Telomerase and Aging
Cells that undergo cell division continue to have their telomeres shortened because most somatic cells do not make
telomerase. This essentially means that telomere shortening is associated with aging. With the advent of modern
medicine, preventative health care, and healthier lifestyles, the human life span has increased, and there is an
increasing demand for people to look younger and have a better quality of life as they grow older.

In 2010, scientists found that telomerase can reverse some age-related conditions in mice. This may have potential
                          2
in regenerative medicine. Telomerase-deficient mice were used in these studies; these mice have tissue atrophy,
stem cell depletion, organ system failure, and impaired tissue injury responses. Telomerase reactivation in these
mice caused extension of telomeres, reduced DNA damage, reversed neurodegeneration, and improved the function
of the testes, spleen, and intestines. Thus, telomere reactivation may have potential for treating age-related
diseases in humans.

Cancer is characterized by uncontrolled cell division of abnormal cells. The cells accumulate mutations, proliferate
uncontrollably, and can migrate to different parts of the body through a process called metastasis. Scientists have
observed that cancerous cells have considerably shortened telomeres and that telomerase is active in these cells.
Interestingly, only after the telomeres were shortened in the cancer cells did the telomerase become active. If the
action of telomerase in these cells can be inhibited by drugs during cancer therapy, then the cancerous cells could
potentially be stopped from further division.

14.6 DNA Repair
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Discuss the different types of mutations in DNA
   • Explain DNA repair mechanisms

DNA replication is a highly accurate process, but mistakes can occasionally occur, such as a DNA polymerase
inserting a wrong base. Uncorrected mistakes may sometimes lead to serious consequences, such as cancer. Repair
mechanisms correct the mistakes. In rare cases, mistakes are not corrected, leading to mutations; in other cases,
repair enzymes are themselves mutated or defective.

Most of the mistakes during DNA replication are promptly corrected by the proofreading ability of DNA polymerase
itself. (Figure 14.17). In proofreading, the DNA pol reads the newly added base before adding the next one, so a
correction can be made. The polymerase checks whether the newly added base has paired correctly with the base in
the template strand. If it is the right base, the next nucleotide is added. If an incorrect base has been added, the
enzyme makes a cut at the phosphodiester bond and releases the wrong nucleotide. This is performed by the 3'
exonuclease action of DNA pol. Once the incorrect nucleotide has been removed, it can be replaced by the correct
one.




                            FIGURE 14.17 Proofreading by DNA polymerase corrects errors during replication.

Some errors are not corrected during replication, but are instead corrected after replication is completed; this type
of repair is known as mismatch repair (Figure 14.18). Specific repair enzymes recognize the mispaired nucleotide
and excise part of the strand that contains it; the excised region is then resynthesized. If the mismatch remains

2 Jaskelioff et al., “Telomerase reactivation reverses tissue degeneration in aged telomerase-deficient mice,” Nature 469 (2011): 102-7.
382   14 • DNA Structure and Function



      uncorrected, it may lead to more permanent damage when the mismatched DNA is replicated. How do mismatch
      repair enzymes recognize which of the two bases is the incorrect one? In E. coli, after replication, the nitrogenous
      base adenine acquires a methyl group; the parental DNA strand will have methyl groups, whereas the newly
      synthesized strand lacks them. Thus, DNA polymerase is able to remove the wrongly incorporated bases from the
      newly synthesized, non-methylated strand. In eukaryotes, the mechanism is not very well understood, but it is
      believed to involve recognition of unsealed nicks in the new strand, as well as a short-term continuing association of
      some of the replication proteins with the new daughter strand after replication has completed.




      FIGURE 14.18 In mismatch repair, the incorrectly added base is detected after replication. The mismatch repair proteins detect this base
      and remove it from the newly synthesized strand by nuclease action. The gap is now filled with the correctly paired base.

      Another type of repair mechanism, nucleotide excision repair, is similar to mismatch repair, except that it is used to
      remove damaged bases rather than mismatched ones. The repair enzymes replace abnormal bases by making a cut
      on both the 3' and 5' ends of the damaged base (Figure 14.19). The segment of DNA is removed and replaced with
      the correctly paired nucleotides by the action of DNA pol. Once the bases are filled in, the remaining gap is sealed
      with a phosphodiester linkage catalyzed by DNA ligase. This repair mechanism is often employed when UV exposure
      causes the formation of pyrimidine dimers.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                        14.6 • DNA Repair    383




FIGURE 14.19 Nucleotide excision repairs thymine dimers. When exposed to UV light, thymines lying adjacent to each other can form
thymine dimers. In normal cells, they are excised and replaced. Credit: Rao, A., Fletcher, S. and Tag, A. Department of Biology, Texas A&M
University.

A well-studied example of mistakes not being corrected is seen in people suffering from xeroderma pigmentosa
(Figure 14.20). Affected individuals have skin that is highly sensitive to UV rays from the sun. When individuals are
exposed to UV light, pyrimidine dimers, especially those of thymine, are formed; people with xeroderma pigmentosa
are not able to repair the damage. These are not repaired because of a defect in the nucleotide excision repair
enzymes, whereas in normal individuals, the thymine dimers are excised and the defect is corrected. The thymine
dimers distort the structure of the DNA double helix, and this may cause problems during DNA replication. People
with xeroderma pigmentosa may have a higher risk of contracting skin cancer than those who don't have the
condition.




FIGURE 14.20 Xeroderma pigmentosa is a condition in which thymine dimerization from exposure to UV light is not repaired. Exposure to
sunlight results in skin lesions. (credit: James Halpern et al.)
384   14 • DNA Structure and Function



      Errors during DNA replication are not the only reason why mutations arise in DNA. Mutations, variations in the
      nucleotide sequence of a genome, can also occur because of damage to DNA. Such mutations may be of two types:
      induced or spontaneous. Induced mutations are those that result from an exposure to chemicals, UV rays, x-rays,
      or some other environmental agent. For example, Charlotte Auerbach and J.M Robson discovered the mutation-
      inducing effects of mustard gas. Spontaneous mutations occur without any exposure to any environmental agent;
      they are a result of natural reactions taking place within the body.

      Mutations may have a wide range of effects. Point mutations are those mutations that affect a single base pair. The
      most common nucleotide mutations are substitutions, in which one base is replaced by another. These substitutions
      can be of two types, either transitions or transversions. Transition substitution refers to a purine or pyrimidine
      being replaced by a base of the same kind; for example, a purine such as adenine may be replaced by the purine
      guanine. Transversion substitution refers to a purine being replaced by a pyrimidine, or vice versa; for example,
      cytosine, a pyrimidine, is replaced by adenine, a purine. Some point mutations are not detectable in the final
      product; these are known as silent mutations. Silent mutations are usually due to a substitution in the third base of a
      codon, which often represents the same amino acid as the original codon. Other point mutations can result in the
      replacement of one amino acid by another, which may alter the function of the protein. Point mutations that
      generate a stop codon can terminate a protein early.

      Some mutations can result in an increased number of copies of the same codon. These are called trinucleotide
      repeat expansions and result in repeated regions of the same amino acid. Mutations can also be the result of the
      addition of a base, known as an insertion, or the removal of a base, also known as deletion. If an insertion or
      deletion results in the alteration of the translational reading frame (a frameshift mutation), the resultant protein is
      usually nonfunctional. Sometimes a piece of DNA from one chromosome may get translocated to another
      chromosome or to another region of the same chromosome; this is also known as translocation. These mutation
      types are shown in Figure 14.21.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             14.6 • DNA Repair   385




       VISUAL CONNECTION




                    FIGURE 14.21 Mutations can lead to changes in the protein sequence encoded by the DNA.

A frameshift mutation that results in the insertion of three nucleotides is often less deleterious than a mutation that
results in the insertion of one nucleotide. Why?


Mutations in repair genes have been known to cause cancer. Many mutated repair genes have been implicated in
certain forms of pancreatic cancer, colon cancer, and colorectal cancer. Mutations can affect either somatic cells or
germ cells. If many mutations accumulate in a somatic cell, they may lead to problems such as the uncontrolled cell
division observed in cancer. If a mutation takes place in germ cells, the mutation will be passed on to the next
generation, as in the case of hemophilia and xeroderma pigmentosa.
386   14 • Key Terms




Key Terms
electrophoresis technique used to separate DNA                of a new DNA strand
   fragments according to size                             primer short stretch of nucleotides that is required to
endonuclease enzymes that cleave the                          initiate replication; in the case of replication, the
   phosphodiester bond within a polynucleotide chain          primer has RNA nucleotides
exonuclease enzymes that cleave nucleotides one at         proofreading function of DNA pol in which it reads
   a time from the end of a polynucleotide chain              the newly added base before adding the next one
helicase during replication, this enzyme helps to          replication fork Y-shaped structure formed during
   open up the DNA helix by breaking the hydrogen             initiation of replication
   bonds                                                   silent mutation mutation that is not expressed
induced mutation mutation that results from                single-strand binding protein during replication,
   exposure to chemicals or environmental agents              protein that binds to the single-stranded DNA; this
lagging strand during replication, the strand that is         helps in keeping the two strands of DNA apart so
   replicated in short fragments and away from the            that they may serve as templates
   replication fork                                        sliding clamp ring-shaped protein that holds the DNA
leading strand strand that is synthesized                     pol on the DNA strand
   continuously in the 5'-3' direction, which is           spontaneous mutation mutation that takes place in
   synthesized in the direction of the replication fork       the cells as a result of chemical reactions taking
ligase enzyme that catalyzes the formation of a               place naturally without exposure to any external
   phosphodiester linkage between the 3' OH and 5'            agent
   phosphate ends of the DNA                               telomerase enzyme that contains a catalytic part and
mismatch repair type of repair mechanism in which             an inbuilt RNA template; it functions to maintain
   mismatched bases are removed after replication             telomeres at chromosome ends
mutation variation in the nucleotide sequence of a         telomere DNA at the end of linear chromosomes
   genome                                                  topoisomerase enzyme that prevents overwinding of
nucleotide excision repair type of DNA repair                 DNA when DNA replication is taking place
   mechanism in which the wrong base, along with a         transformation process in which external DNA is
   few nucleotides upstream or downstream, are                taken up by a cell
   removed                                                 transition substitution when a purine is replaced
Okazaki fragment DNA fragment that is synthesized             with a purine or a pyrimidine is replaced with
   in short stretches on the lagging strand                   another pyrimidine
point mutation mutation that affects a single base         transversion substitution when a purine is replaced
primase enzyme that synthesizes the RNA primer;               by a pyrimidine or a pyrimidine is replaced by a
   the primer is needed for DNA pol to start synthesis        purine

Chapter Summary
14.1 Historical Basis of Modern                            14.2 DNA Structure and Sequencing
Understanding                                              The currently accepted model of the double-helix
DNA was first isolated from white blood cells by           structure of DNA was proposed by Watson and Crick.
Friedrich Miescher, who called it nuclein because it was   Some of the salient features are that the two strands
isolated from nuclei. Frederick Griffith's experiments     that make up the double helix have complementary
with strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae provided the      base sequences and anti-parallel orientations.
first hint that DNA may be the transforming principle.     Alternating deoxyribose sugars and phosphates form
Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty showed that DNA is             the backbone of the structure, and the nitrogenous
required for the transformation of bacteria. Later         bases are stacked like rungs inside. The diameter of
experiments by Hershey and Chase using                     the double helix, 2 nm, is uniform throughout. A purine
bacteriophage T2 proved that DNA is the genetic            always pairs with a pyrimidine; A pairs with T, and G
material. Chargaff found that the ratio of A = T and C =   pairs with C. One turn of the helix has 10 base pairs.
G, and that the percentage content of A, T, G, and C is    Prokaryotes are much simpler than eukaryotes in many
different for different species.                           of their features. Most prokaryotes contain a single,
                                                           circular chromosome. In general, eukaryotic
                                                           chromosomes contain a linear DNA molecule packaged



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   14 • Visual Connection Questions   387



into nucleosomes, and have two distinct regions that           strand.
can be distinguished by staining, reflecting different
states of packaging and compaction.
                                                               14.5 DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
                                                               Replication in eukaryotes starts at multiple origins of
14.3 Basics of DNA Replication
                                                               replication. The mechanism is quite similar to that in
During cell division, each daughter cell receives a copy       prokaryotes. A primer is required to initiate synthesis,
of each molecule of DNA by a process known as DNA              which is then extended by DNA polymerase as it adds
replication. The single chromosome of a prokaryote or          nucleotides one by one to the growing chain. The
each chromosome of a eukaryote consists of a single            leading strand is synthesized continuously, whereas
continuous double helix. The model for DNA replication         the lagging strand is synthesized in short stretches
suggests that the two strands of the double helix              called Okazaki fragments. The RNA primers are
separate during replication, and each strand serves as         replaced with DNA nucleotides; the DNA Okazaki
a template from which the new complementary strand             fragments are linked into one continuous strand by
is copied. In the conservative model of replication, the       DNA ligase. The ends of the chromosomes pose a
parental DNA is conserved, and the daughter DNA is             problem as the primer RNA at the 5’ ends of the DNA
newly synthesized. The semi-conservative model                 cannot be replaced with DNA, and the chromosome is
suggests that each of the two parental DNA strands             progressively shortened. Telomerase, an enzyme with
acts as template for new DNA to be synthesized; after          an inbuilt RNA template, extends the ends by copying
replication, each double-stranded DNA retains the              the RNA template and extending one strand of the
parental or “old” strand and one “new” strand. The             chromosome. DNA polymerase can then fill in the
dispersive model suggested that the two copies of the          complementary DNA strand using the regular
DNA would have segments of parental DNA and newly              replication enzymes. In this way, the ends of the
synthesized DNA. The Meselson and Stahl experiment             chromosomes are protected.
supported the semi-conservative model of replication,
in which an entire replicated chromosome consists of
                                                               14.6 DNA Repair
one parental strand and one newly synthesized strand           DNA polymerase can make mistakes while adding
of DNA.                                                        nucleotides. It edits the DNA by proofreading every
                                                               newly added base. Incorrect bases are removed and
14.4 DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
                                                               replaced by the correct base before proceeding with
Replication in prokaryotes starts from a sequence              elongation. Most mistakes are corrected during
found on the chromosome called the origin of                   replication, although when this does not happen, the
replication—the point at which the DNA opens up.               mismatch repair mechanism is employed. Mismatch
Helicase opens up the DNA double helix, resulting in           repair enzymes recognize the wrongly incorporated
the formation of the replication fork. Single-strand           base and excise it from the DNA, replacing it with the
binding proteins bind to the single-stranded DNA near          correct base. In yet another type of repair, nucleotide
the replication fork to keep the fork open. Primase            excision repair, a damaged base is removed along with
synthesizes an RNA primer to initiate synthesis by DNA         a few bases on the 5' and 3' end, and these are
polymerase, which can add nucleotides only to the 3'           replaced by copying the template with the help of DNA
end of a previously synthesized primer strand. Both            polymerase. The ends of the newly synthesized
new DNA strands grow according to their respective             fragment are attached to the rest of the DNA using DNA
5'-3' directions. One strand is synthesized continuously       ligase, which creates a phosphodiester bond.
in the direction of the replication fork; this is called the
                                                               Most mistakes are corrected, and if they are not, they
leading strand. The other strand is synthesized in a
                                                               may result in a mutation, defined as a permanent
direction away from the replication fork, in short
                                                               change in the DNA sequence. Mutations can be of
stretches of DNA known as Okazaki fragments. This
                                                               many types, such as substitution, deletion, insertion,
strand is known as the lagging strand. Once replication
                                                               and trinucleotide repeat expansions. Mutations in
is completed, the RNA primers are replaced by DNA
                                                               repair genes may lead to serious consequences such
nucleotides and the DNA is sealed with DNA ligase,
                                                               as cancer. Mutations can be induced or may occur
which creates phosphodiester bonds between the 3'-
                                                               spontaneously.
OH of one end and the 5' phosphate of the other

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 14.10 In eukaryotic cells, DNA and RNA                  synthesis occur in a separate compartment from
388   14 • Review Questions



       protein synthesis. In prokaryotic cells, both          suspect that a mutation has occurred in an
       processes occur together. What advantages              enzyme found at the replication fork. Which
       might there be to separating the processes?            enzyme is most likely to be mutated?
       What advantages might there be to having them
                                                           3. Figure 14.21 A frameshift mutation that results
       occur together?
                                                              in the insertion of three nucleotides is often less
   2. Figure 14.14 You isolate a cell strain in which         deleterious than a mutation that results in the
      the joining of Okazaki fragments is impaired and        insertion of one nucleotide. Why?

Review Questions
   4. If DNA of a particular species was analyzed and           d. histones
      it was found that it contains 27 percent A, what
      would be the percentage of C?                        9. Meselson and Stahl's experiments proved that
         a. 27 percent                                        DNA replicates by which mode?
         b. 30 percent                                         a. conservative
         c. 23 percent                                         b. semi-conservative
         d. 54 percent                                         c. dispersive
                                                               d. none of the above
   5. The experiments by Hershey and Chase helped
      confirm that DNA was the hereditary material on     10. If the sequence of the 5'-3' strand is AATGCTAC,
      the basis of the finding that:                          then the complementary sequence has the
        a. radioactive phage were found in the pellet         following sequence:
        b. radioactive cells were found in the                   a. 3'-AATGCTAC-5'
            supernatant                                          b. 3'-CATCGTAA-5'
        c. radioactive sulfur was found inside the cell          c. 3'-TTACGATG-5'
        d. radioactive phosphorus was found in the               d. 3'-GTAGCATT-5'
            cell
                                                          11. How did Meselson and Stahl support Watson
   6. Bacterial transformation is a major concern in          and Crick’s double-helix model?
      many medical settings. Why might health care              a. They demonstrated that each strand
      providers be concerned?                                      serves as a template for synthesizing a
        a. Pathogenic bacteria could introduce                     new strand of DNA.
            disease-causing genes in non-pathogenic             b. They showed that the DNA strands break
            bacteria.                                              and recombine without losing genetic
        b. Antibiotic resistance genes could be                    material.
            introduced to new bacteria to create                c. They proved that DNA maintains a double-
            “superbugs.”                                           helix structure while undergoing semi-
        c. Bacteriophages could spread DNA                         conservative replication.
            encoding toxins to new bacteria.                    d. They demonstrated that conservative
        d. All of the above.                                       replication maintains the complementary
                                                                   base pairing of each DNA helix.
   7. DNA double helix does not have which of the
      following?                                          12. Which of the following components is not
        a. antiparallel configuration                         involved during the formation of the replication
        b. complementary base pairing                         fork?
        c. major and minor grooves                              a. single-strand binding proteins
        d. uracil                                               b. helicase
                                                                c. origin of replication
   8. In eukaryotes, what is the DNA wrapped                    d. ligase
      around?
        a. single-stranded binding proteins               13. Which of the following does the enzyme primase
        b. sliding clamp                                      synthesize?
        c. polymerase                                           a. DNA primer




Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            14 • Critical Thinking Questions   389



       b. RNA primer                                              prokaryotic replication uses a single origin
       c. Okazaki fragments                                       to rapidly replicate the entire genome.
       d. phosphodiester linkage                               c. DNA replication always occurs in the
                                                                  nucleus.
 14. In which direction does DNA replication take              d. Eukaryotic DNA replication involves more
     place?                                                       polymerases than prokaryotic replication.
       a. 5'-3'
       b. 3'-5'                                          18. During proofreading, which of the following
       c. 5'                                                 enzymes reads the DNA?
       d. 3'                                                   a. primase
                                                               b. topoisomerase
 15. A scientist randomly mutates the DNA of a                 c. DNA polymerase
     bacterium. She then sequences the bacterium’s             d. helicase
     daughter cells, and finds that the daughters have
     many errors in their replicated DNA. The parent     19. The initial mechanism for repairing nucleotide
     bacterium likely acquired a mutation in which           errors in DNA is ________.
     enzyme?                                                   a. mismatch repair
       a. DNA ligase                                           b. DNA polymerase proofreading
       b. DNA pol II                                           c. nucleotide excision repair
       c. Primase                                              d. thymine dimers
       d. DNA pol I
                                                         20. A scientist creates fruit fly larvae with a
 16. The ends of the linear chromosomes are                  mutation that eliminates the exonuclease
     maintained by                                           function of DNA pol. Which prediction about the
       a. helicase                                           mutational load in the adult fruit flies is most
       b. primase                                            likely to be correct?
       c. DNA pol                                               a. The adults with the DNA pol mutation will
       d. telomerase                                                have significantly more mutations than
                                                                    average.
 17. Which of the following is not a true statement             b. The adults with the DNA pol mutation will
     comparing prokaryotic and eukaryotic DNA                       have slightly more mutations than
     replication?                                                   average.
       a. Both eukaryotic and prokaryotic DNA                   c. The adults with the DNA pol mutation will
           polymerases build off RNA primers made                   have the same number of mutations as
           by primase.                                              average.
       b. Eukaryotic DNA replication requires                   d. The adults with the DNA pol mutation will
           multiple replication forks, while                        have fewer mutations than average.


Critical Thinking Questions
 21. Explain Griffith's transformation experiments.          sequencing method.
     What did he conclude from them?
                                                         25. Describe the structure and complementary base
 22. Why were radioactive sulfur and phosphorous             pairing of DNA.
     used to label bacteriophage in Hershey and
                                                         26. Prokaryotes have a single circular chromosome
     Chase's experiments?
                                                             while eukaryotes have linear chromosomes.
 23. When Chargaff was performing his experiments,           Describe one advantage and one disadvantage
     the tetranucleotide hypothesis, which stated            to the eukaryotic genome packaging compared
     that DNA was composed of GACT nucleotide                to the prokaryotes.
     repeats, was the most widely accepted view of
                                                         27. How did the scientific community learn that DNA
     DNA’s composition. How did Chargaff disprove
                                                             replication takes place in a semi-conservative
     this hypothesis?
                                                             fashion?
 24. Provide a brief summary of the Sanger
                                                         28. Imagine the Meselson and Stahl experiments
390   14 • Critical Thinking Questions



       had supported conservative replication instead          What would happen if you forgot to add a primer
       of semi-conservative replication. What results          in a tube containing the reaction mix for a DNA
       would you predict to observe after two rounds of        sequencing reaction?
       replication? Be specific regarding percent
                                                           34. Quinolone antibiotics treat bacterial infections
       distributions of DNA incorporating 15N and 14N
                                                               by blocking the activity of topoisomerase. Why
       in the gradient.
                                                               does this treatment work? Explain what occurs
  29. DNA replication is bidirectional and                     at the molecular level.
      discontinuous; explain your understanding of
                                                           35. How do the linear chromosomes in eukaryotes
      those concepts.
                                                               ensure that its ends are replicated completely?
  30. What are Okazaki fragments and how they are
                                                           36. What is the consequence of mutation of a
      formed?
                                                               mismatch repair enzyme? How will this affect
  31. If the rate of replication in a particular               the function of a gene?
      prokaryote is 900 nucleotides per second, how
                                                           37. An adult with a history of tanning has his
      long would it take 1.2 million base pair genomes
                                                               genome sequenced. The beginning of a protein-
      to make two copies?
                                                               coding region of his DNA reads
  32. Explain the events taking place at the replication       ATGGGGATATGGCAT. If the protein-coding
      fork. If the gene for helicase is mutated, what          region of a healthy adult reads
      part of replication will be affected?                    ATGGGGATATGAGCAT, identify the site and type
                                                               of mutation.
  33. What is the role of a primer in DNA replication?




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 15
Genes and Proteins




FIGURE 15.1 Genes, which are carried on (a) chromosomes, are linearly organized instructions for making the RNA
and protein molecules that are necessary for all of the processes of life. The (b) interleukin-2 protein and (c)
alpha-2u-globulin protein are just two examples of the array of different molecular structures that are encoded by
genes. (credit “chromosome: National Human Genome Research Institute; credit “interleukin-2”: Ramin Herati/
Created from PDB 1M47 and rendered with Pymol; credit “alpha-2u-globulin”: Darren Logan/rendered with AISMIG)


CHAPTER OUTLINE
15.1 The Genetic Code
15.2 Prokaryotic Transcription
15.3 Eukaryotic Transcription
15.4 RNA Processing in Eukaryotes
15.5 Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis


INTRODUCTION Since the rediscovery of Mendel’s work in 1900, the definition of the gene has
progressed from an abstract unit of heredity to a tangible molecular entity capable of replication,
expression, and mutation (Figure 15.1). Genes are composed of DNA and are linearly arranged on
chromosomes. Genes specify the sequences of amino acids, which are the building blocks of
proteins. In turn, proteins are responsible for orchestrating nearly every function of the cell. Both
genes and the proteins they encode are absolutely essential to life as we know it.

15.1 The Genetic Code
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Explain the “central dogma” of DNA-protein synthesis
   • Describe the genetic code and how the nucleotide sequence prescribes the amino acid and
      the protein sequence

The cellular process of transcription generates messenger RNA (mRNA), a mobile molecular copy
of one or more genes with an alphabet of A, C, G, and uracil (U). Translation of the mRNA template
on ribosomes converts nucleotide-based genetic information into a protein product. That is the
central dogma of DNA-protein synthesis. Protein sequences consist of 20 commonly occurring
amino acids; therefore, it can be said that the protein alphabet consists of 20 “letters” (Figure
15.2). Different amino acids have different chemistries (such as acidic versus basic, or polar and
392   15 • Genes and Proteins



      nonpolar) and different structural constraints. Variation in amino acid sequence is responsible for
      the enormous variation in protein structure and function.




      FIGURE 15.2 Structures of the 20 amino acids found in proteins are shown. Each amino acid is composed of an amino
      group (      ), a carboxyl group (COO-), and a side chain (blue). The side chain may be nonpolar, polar, or charged, as
      well as large or small. It is the variety of amino acid side chains that gives rise to the incredible variation of protein
      structure and function.

      The Central Dogma: DNA Encodes RNA; RNA Encodes Protein
      The flow of genetic information in cells from DNA to mRNA to protein is described by the central
      dogma (Figure 15.3), which states that genes specify the sequence of mRNAs, which in turn
      specify the sequence of amino acids making up all proteins. The decoding of one molecule to
      another is performed by specific proteins and RNAs. Because the information stored in DNA is so
      central to cellular function, it makes intuitive sense that the cell would make mRNA copies of this
      information for protein synthesis, while keeping the DNA itself intact and protected. The copying
      of DNA to RNA is relatively straightforward, with one nucleotide being added to the mRNA strand
      for every nucleotide read in the DNA strand. The translation to protein is a bit more complex
      because three mRNA nucleotides correspond to one amino acid in the polypeptide sequence.
      However, the translation to protein is still systematic and colinear, such that nucleotides 1 to 3
      correspond to amino acid 1, nucleotides 4 to 6 correspond to amino acid 2, and so on.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             15.1 • The Genetic Code    393




FIGURE 15.3 Instructions on DNA are transcribed onto messenger RNA. Ribosomes are able to read the genetic information inscribed on a
strand of messenger RNA and use this information to string amino acids together into a protein.

The Genetic Code Is Degenerate and Universal
Each amino acid is defined by a three-nucleotide sequence called the triplet codon. Given the different numbers of
“letters” in the mRNA and protein “alphabets,” scientists theorized that single amino acids must be represented by
combinations of nucleotides. Nucleotide doublets would not be sufficient to specify every amino acid because there
are only 16 possible two-nucleotide combinations (42). In contrast, there are 64 possible nucleotide triplets (43),
which is far more than the number of amino acids. Scientists theorized that amino acids were encoded by nucleotide
394   15 • Genes and Proteins



      triplets and that the genetic code was “degenerate.” In other words, a given amino acid could be encoded by more
      than one nucleotide triplet. This was later confirmed experimentally: Francis Crick and Sydney Brenner used the
      chemical mutagen proflavin to insert one, two, or three nucleotides into the gene of a virus. When one or two
      nucleotides were inserted, the normal proteins were not produced. When three nucleotides were inserted, the
      protein was synthesized and functional. This demonstrated that the amino acids must be specified by groups of
      three nucleotides. These nucleotide triplets are called codons. The insertion of one or two nucleotides completely
      changed the triplet reading frame, thereby altering the message for every subsequent amino acid (Figure 15.5).
      Though insertion of three nucleotides caused an extra amino acid to be inserted during translation, the integrity of
      the rest of the protein was maintained.

      Scientists painstakingly solved the genetic code by translating synthetic mRNAs in vitro and sequencing the proteins
      they specified (Figure 15.4).




      FIGURE 15.4 This figure shows the genetic code for translating each nucleotide triplet in mRNA into an amino acid or a termination signal in
      a protein. (credit: modification of work by NIH)

      In addition to codons that instruct the addition of a specific amino acid to a polypeptide chain, three of the 64
      codons terminate protein synthesis and release the polypeptide from the translation machinery. These triplets are
      called nonsense codons, or stop codons. Another codon, AUG, also has a special function. In addition to specifying
      the amino acid methionine, it also serves as the start codon to initiate translation. The reading frame for translation
      is set by the AUG start codon near the 5' end of the mRNA. Following the start codon, the mRNA is read in groups of
      three until a stop codon is encountered.

      The arrangement of the coding table reveals the structure of the code. There are sixteen "blocks" of codons, each
      specified by the first and second nucleotides of the codons within the block, e.g., the "AC*" block that corresponds
      to the amino acid threonine (Thr). Some blocks are divided into a pyrimidine half, in which the codon ends with U or
      C, and a purine half, in which the codon ends with A or G. Some amino acids get a whole block of four codons, like
      alanine (Ala), threonine (Thr) and proline (Pro). Some get the pyrimidine half of their block, like histidine (His) and
      asparagine (Asn). Others get the purine half of their block, like glutamate (Glu) and lysine (Lys). Note that some
      amino acids get a block and a half-block for a total of six codons.

      The specification of a single amino acid by multiple similar codons is called "degeneracy." Degeneracy is believed to
      be a cellular mechanism to reduce the negative impact of random mutations. Codons that specify the same amino
      acid typically only differ by one nucleotide. In addition, amino acids with chemically similar side chains are encoded
      by similar codons. For example, aspartate (Asp) and glutamate (Glu), which occupy the GA* block, are both
      negatively charged. This nuance of the genetic code ensures that a single-nucleotide substitution mutation might



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                    15.1 • The Genetic Code   395



specify the same amino acid but have no effect or specify a similar amino acid, preventing the protein from being
rendered completely nonfunctional.

The genetic code is nearly universal. With a few minor exceptions, virtually all species use the same genetic code for
protein synthesis. Conservation of codons means that a purified mRNA encoding the globin protein in horses could
be transferred to a tulip cell, and the tulip would synthesize horse globin. That there is only one genetic code is
powerful evidence that all of life on Earth shares a common origin, especially considering that there are about 1084
possible combinations of 20 amino acids and 64 triplet codons.

     LINK TO LEARNING
Transcribe a gene and translate it to protein using complementary pairing and the genetic code at this site
(https://openstax.org/l/create_protein).




FIGURE 15.5 The deletion of two nucleotides shifts the reading frame of an mRNA and changes the entire protein message, creating a
nonfunctional protein or terminating protein synthesis altogether.



        SCIENTIFIC METHOD CONNECTION

Which Has More DNA: A Kiwi or a Strawberry?




FIGURE 15.6 Do you think that a kiwi or a strawberry has more DNA per fruit? (credit “kiwi”: "Kelbv"/Flickr; credit: “strawberry”: Alisdair
McDiarmid)

Question: Would a kiwi and strawberry that are approximately the same size (Figure 15.6) also have approximately
the same amount of DNA?

Background: Genes are carried on chromosomes and are made of DNA. All mammals are diploid, meaning they
have two copies of each chromosome. However, not all plants are diploid. The common strawberry is octoploid (8n)
and the cultivated kiwi is hexaploid (6n). Research the total number of chromosomes in the cells of each of these
fruits and think about how this might correspond to the amount of DNA in these fruits’ cell nuclei. What other factors
might contribute to the total amount of DNA in a single fruit? Read about the technique of DNA isolation to
understand how each step in the isolation protocol helps liberate and precipitate DNA.

Hypothesis: Hypothesize whether you would be able to detect a difference in DNA quantity from similarly sized
strawberries and kiwis. Which fruit do you think would yield more DNA?

Test your hypothesis: Isolate the DNA from a strawberry and a kiwi that are similarly sized. Perform the experiment
396   15 • Genes and Proteins



      in at least triplicate for each fruit

        1. Prepare a bottle of DNA extraction buffer from 900 mL water, 50 mL dish detergent, and two teaspoons of
           table salt. Mix by inversion (cap it and turn it upside down a few times).
        2. Grind a strawberry and a kiwi by hand in a plastic bag, or using a mortar and pestle, or with a metal bowl and
           the end of a blunt instrument. Grind for at least two minutes per fruit.
        3. Add 10 mL of the DNA extraction buffer to each fruit, and mix well for at least one minute.
        4. Remove cellular debris by filtering each fruit mixture through cheesecloth or porous cloth and into a funnel
           placed in a test tube or an appropriate container.
        5. Pour ice-cold ethanol or isopropanol (rubbing alcohol) into the test tube. You should observe white,
           precipitated DNA.
        6. Gather the DNA from each fruit by winding it around separate glass rods.

      Record your observations: Because you are not quantitatively measuring DNA volume, you can record for each trial
      whether the two fruits produced the same or different amounts of DNA as observed by eye. If one or the other fruit
      produced noticeably more DNA, record this as well. Determine whether your observations are consistent with
      several pieces of each fruit.

      Analyze your data: Did you notice an obvious difference in the amount of DNA produced by each fruit? Were your
      results reproducible?

      Draw a conclusion: Given what you know about the number of chromosomes in each fruit, can you conclude that
      chromosome number necessarily correlates to DNA amount? Can you identify any drawbacks to this procedure? If
      you had access to a laboratory, how could you standardize your comparison and make it more quantitative?


      15.2 Prokaryotic Transcription
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • List the different steps in prokaryotic transcription
         • Discuss the role of promoters in prokaryotic transcription
         • Describe how and when transcription is terminated

      The prokaryotes, which include Bacteria and Archaea, are mostly single-celled organisms that, by definition, lack
      membrane-bound nuclei and other organelles. A bacterial chromosome is a closed circle that, unlike eukaryotic
      chromosomes, is not organized around histone proteins. The central region of the cell in which prokaryotic DNA
      resides is called the nucleoid region. In addition, prokaryotes often have abundant plasmids, which are shorter,
      circular DNA molecules that may only contain one or a few genes. Plasmids can be transferred independently of the
      bacterial chromosome during cell division and often carry traits such as those involved with antibiotic resistance.

      Transcription in prokaryotes (and in eukaryotes) requires the DNA double helix to partially unwind in the region of
      mRNA synthesis. The region of unwinding is called a transcription bubble. Transcription always proceeds from the
      same DNA strand for each gene, which is called the template strand. The mRNA product is complementary to the
      template strand and is almost identical to the other DNA strand, called the nontemplate strand, or the coding
      strand. The only nucleotide difference is that in mRNA, all of the T nucleotides are replaced with U nucleotides
      (Figure 15.7). In an RNA double helix, A can bind U via two hydrogen bonds, just as in A–T pairing in a DNA double
      helix.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        15.2 • Prokaryotic Transcription     397




FIGURE 15.7 Messenger RNA is a copy of protein-coding information in the coding strand of DNA, with the substitution of U in the RNA for T
in the coding sequence. However, new RNA nucleotides base pair with the nucleotides of the template strand. RNA is synthesized in its
5'-3' direction, using the enzyme RNA polymerase. As the template is read, the DNA unwinds ahead of the polymerase and then rewinds
behind it.

The nucleotide pair in the DNA double helix that corresponds to the site from which the first 5' mRNA nucleotide is
transcribed is called the +1 site, or the initiation site. Nucleotides preceding the initiation site are denoted with a “-
” and are designated upstream nucleotides. Conversely, nucleotides following the initiation site are denoted with
“+” numbering and are called downstream nucleotides.

Initiation of Transcription in Prokaryotes
Prokaryotes do not have membrane-enclosed nuclei. Therefore, the processes of transcription, translation, and
mRNA degradation can all occur simultaneously. The intracellular level of a bacterial protein can quickly be
amplified by multiple transcription and translation events that occur concurrently on the same DNA template.
Prokaryotic genomes are very compact, and prokaryotic transcripts often cover more than one gene or cistron (a
coding sequence for a single protein). Polycistronic mRNAs are then translated to produce more than one kind of
protein.

Our discussion here will exemplify transcription by describing this process in Escherichia coli, a well-studied
eubacterial species. Although some differences exist between transcription in E. coli and transcription in archaea,
an understanding of E. coli transcription can be applied to virtually all bacterial species.

Prokaryotic RNA Polymerase
Prokaryotes use the same RNA polymerase to transcribe all of their genes. In E. coli, the polymerase is composed of
five polypeptide subunits, two of which are identical. Four of these subunits, denoted α, α, β, and β', comprise the
polymerase core enzyme. These subunits assemble every time a gene is transcribed, and they disassemble once
transcription is complete. Each subunit has a unique role; the two α-subunits are necessary to assemble the
polymerase on the DNA; the β-subunit binds to the ribonucleoside triphosphate that will become part of the nascent
mRNA molecule; and the β' subunit binds the DNA template strand. The fifth subunit, σ, is involved only in
transcription initiation. It confers transcriptional specificity such that the polymerase begins to synthesize mRNA
from an appropriate initiation site. Without σ, the core enzyme would transcribe from random sites and would
produce mRNA molecules that specified protein gibberish. The polymerase comprised of all five subunits is called
the holoenzyme.

Prokaryotic Promoters
A promoter is a DNA sequence onto which the transcription machinery, including RNA polymerase, binds and
initiates transcription. In most cases, promoters exist upstream of the genes they regulate. The specific sequence of
a promoter is very important because it determines whether the corresponding gene is transcribed all the time,
some of the time, or infrequently. Although promoters vary among prokaryotic genomes, a few elements are
evolutionarily conserved in many species. At the -10 and -35 regions upstream of the initiation site, there are two
promoter consensus sequences, or regions that are similar across all promoters and across various bacterial
species (Figure 15.8). The -10 sequence, called the -10 region, has the consensus sequence TATAAT. The -35
sequence has the consensus sequence TTGACA. These consensus sequences are recognized and bound by σ. Once
398   15 • Genes and Proteins



      this interaction is made, the subunits of the core enzyme bind to the site. The A–T-rich -10 region facilitates
      unwinding of the DNA template, and several phosphodiester bonds are made. The transcription initiation phase
      ends with the production of abortive transcripts, which are polymers of approximately 10 nucleotides that are made
      and released.




      FIGURE 15.8 The σ subunit of prokaryotic RNA polymerase recognizes consensus sequences found in the promoter region upstream of the
      transcription start site. The σ subunit dissociates from the polymerase after transcription has been initiated.


           LINK TO LEARNING
      View this MolecularMovies animation (https://openstax.org/l/transcription) to see the transcription process as it
      happens in the cell.


      Elongation and Termination in Prokaryotes
      The transcription elongation phase begins with the release of the σ subunit from the polymerase. The dissociation of
      σ allows the core enzyme to proceed along the DNA template, synthesizing mRNA in the 5' to 3' direction at a rate of
      approximately 40 nucleotides per second. As elongation proceeds, the DNA is continuously unwound ahead of the
      core enzyme and rewound behind it. The base pairing between DNA and RNA is not stable enough to maintain the
      stability of the mRNA synthesis components. Instead, the RNA polymerase acts as a stable linker between the DNA
      template and the nascent RNA strands to ensure that elongation is not interrupted prematurely.

      Prokaryotic Termination Signals
      Once a gene is transcribed, the prokaryotic polymerase needs to be instructed to dissociate from the DNA template
      and liberate the newly made mRNA. Depending on the gene being transcribed, there are two kinds of termination
      signals. One is protein-based and the other is RNA-based. Rho-dependent termination is controlled by the rho (ρ)
      protein, which tracks along behind the polymerase on the growing mRNA chain. Near the end of the gene, the
      polymerase encounters a run of G nucleotides on the DNA template and it stalls. As a result, the rho protein collides
      with the polymerase. The interaction with rho releases the mRNA from the transcription bubble.

      Rho-independent termination is controlled by specific sequences in the DNA template strand. As the polymerase
      nears the end of the gene being transcribed, it encounters a region rich in C–G nucleotides. The mRNA folds back on
      itself, and the complementary C–G nucleotides bind together. The result is a stable hairpin that causes the
      polymerase to stall as soon as it begins to transcribe a region rich in A–T nucleotides. The complementary U–A
      region of the mRNA transcript forms only a weak interaction with the template DNA. This, coupled with the stalled
      polymerase, induces enough instability for the core enzyme to break away and liberate the new mRNA transcript.

      Upon termination, the process of transcription is complete. By the time termination occurs, the prokaryotic
      transcript would already have been used to begin synthesis of numerous copies of the encoded protein because
      these processes can occur concurrently. The unification of transcription, translation, and even mRNA degradation is
      possible because all of these processes occur in the same 5' to 3' direction, and because there is no membranous
      compartmentalization in the prokaryotic cell (Figure 15.9). In contrast, the presence of a nucleus in eukaryotic cells
      precludes simultaneous transcription and translation.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     15.3 • Eukaryotic Transcription   399




FIGURE 15.9 Multiple polymerases can transcribe a single bacterial gene while numerous ribosomes concurrently translate the mRNA
transcripts into polypeptides. In this way, a specific protein can rapidly reach a high concentration in the bacterial cell.


     LINK TO LEARNING
Visit this BioStudio animation (https://openstax.org/l/transcription2) to see the process of prokaryotic transcription.


15.3 Eukaryotic Transcription
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • List the steps in eukaryotic transcription
   • Discuss the role of RNA polymerases in transcription
   • Compare and contrast the three RNA polymerases
   • Explain the significance of transcription factors

Prokaryotes and eukaryotes perform fundamentally the same process of transcription, with a few key differences.
The most important difference between prokaryote and eukaryote transcription is due to the latter’s membrane-
bound nucleus and organelles. With the genes bound in a nucleus, the eukaryotic cell must be able to transport its
mRNA to the cytoplasm and must protect its mRNA from degrading before it is translated. Eukaryotes also employ
three different polymerases that each transcribe a different subset of genes. Eukaryotic mRNAs are usually
monogenic, meaning that they specify a single protein.

Initiation of Transcription in Eukaryotes
Unlike the prokaryotic polymerase that can bind to a DNA template on its own, eukaryotes require several other
proteins, called transcription factors, to first bind to the promoter region and then to help recruit the appropriate
polymerase.

The Three Eukaryotic RNA Polymerases
The features of eukaryotic mRNA synthesis are markedly more complex than those of prokaryotes. Instead of a
single polymerase comprising five subunits, the eukaryotes have three polymerases that are each made up of 10
subunits or more. Each eukaryotic polymerase also requires a distinct set of transcription factors to bring it to the
DNA template.

RNA polymerase I is located in the nucleolus, a specialized nuclear substructure in which ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is
transcribed, processed, and assembled into ribosomes (Table 15.1). The rRNA molecules are considered structural
RNAs because they have a cellular role but are not translated into protein. The rRNAs are components of the
ribosome and are essential to the process of translation. RNA polymerase I synthesizes all of the rRNAs from the
tandemly duplicated set of 18S, 5.8S, and 28S ribosomal genes. (Note that the “S” designation applies to
“Svedberg” units, a nonadditive value that characterizes the speed at which a particle sediments during
centrifugation.)
400   15 • Genes and Proteins




                          Locations, Products, and Sensitivities of the Three Eukaryotic RNA Polymerases

             RNA                     Cellular                                                            α-Amanitin
                                                              Product of Transcription
          Polymerase               Compartment                                                           Sensitivity

                 I              Nucleolus              All rRNAs except 5S rRNA                    Insensitive

                II              Nucleus                All protein-coding nuclear pre-mRNAs        Extremely sensitive

                                                       5S rRNA, tRNAs, and small nuclear
                III             Nucleus                                                            Moderately sensitive
                                                       RNAs

      TABLE 15.1

      RNA polymerase II is located in the nucleus and synthesizes all protein-coding nuclear pre-mRNAs. Eukaryotic pre-
      mRNAs undergo extensive processing after transcription but before translation. For clarity, this module’s discussion
      of transcription and translation in eukaryotes will use the term “mRNAs” to describe only the mature, processed
      molecules that are ready to be translated. RNA polymerase II is responsible for transcribing the overwhelming
      majority of eukaryotic genes.

      RNA polymerase III is also located in the nucleus. This polymerase transcribes a variety of structural RNAs that
      includes the 5S pre-rRNA, transfer pre-RNAs (pre-tRNAs), and small nuclear pre-RNAs. The tRNAs have a critical
      role in translation; they serve as the “adaptor molecules” between the mRNA template and the growing polypeptide
      chain. Small nuclear RNAs have a variety of functions, including “splicing” pre-mRNAs and regulating transcription
      factors.

      A scientist characterizing a new gene can determine which polymerase transcribes it by testing whether the gene is
      expressed in the presence of α-amanitin, an oligopeptide toxin produced by the fly agaric toadstool mushroom and
      other species of Amanita. Interestingly, the α-amanitin affects the three polymerases very differently (Table 15.1).
      RNA polymerase I is completely insensitive to α-amanitin, meaning that the polymerase can transcribe DNA in vitro
      in the presence of this poison. RNA polymerase III is moderately sensitive to the toxin. In contrast, RNA polymerase
      II is extremely sensitive to α-amanitin. The toxin prevents the enzyme from progressing down the DNA, and thus
      inhibits transcription. Knowing the transcribing polymerase can provide clues as to the general function of the gene
      being studied. Because RNA polymerase II transcribes the vast majority of genes, we will focus on this polymerase
      in our subsequent discussions about eukaryotic transcription factors and promoters.

      RNA Polymerase II Promoters and Transcription Factors
      Eukaryotic promoters are much larger and more intricate than prokaryotic promoters. However, both have a
      sequence similar to the -10 sequence of prokaryotes. In eukaryotes, this sequence is called the TATA box, and has
      the consensus sequence TATAAA on the coding strand. It is located at -25 to -35 bases relative to the initiation (+1)
      site (Figure 15.10). This sequence is not identical to the E. coli -10 box, but it conserves the A–T rich element. The
      thermostability of A–T bonds is low and this helps the DNA template to locally unwind in preparation for
      transcription.

      Instead of the simple σ factor that helps bind the prokaryotic RNA polymerase to its promoter, eukaryotes assemble
      a complex of transcription factors required to recruit RNA polymerase II to a protein coding gene. Transcription
      factors that bind to the promoter are called basal transcription factors. These basal factors are all called TFII (for
      Transcription Factor/polymerase II) plus an additional letter (A-J). The core complex is TFIID, which includes a
      TATA-binding protein (TBP). The other transcription factors systematically fall into place on the DNA template, with
      each one further stabilizing the pre-initiation complex and contributing to the recruitment of RNA polymerase II.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       15.3 • Eukaryotic Transcription   401




        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 15.10 A generalized promoter of a gene transcribed by RNA polymerase II is shown. Transcription factors recognize the promoter.
RNA polymerase II then binds and forms the transcription initiation complex.

A scientist splices a eukaryotic promoter in front of a bacterial gene and inserts the gene in a bacterial chromosome.
Would you expect the bacteria to transcribe the gene?


Some eukaryotic promoters also have a conserved CAAT box (GGCCAATCT) at approximately -80. Further upstream
of the TATA box, eukaryotic promoters may also contain one or more GC-rich boxes (GGCG) or octamer boxes
(ATTTGCAT). These elements bind cellular factors that increase the efficiency of transcription initiation and are
often identified in more “active” genes that are constantly being expressed by the cell.

Basal transcription factors are crucial in the formation of a preinitiation complex on the DNA template that
subsequently recruits RNA polymerase II for transcription initiation. The complexity of eukaryotic transcription does
not end with the polymerases and promoters. An army of other transcription factors, which bind to upstream
enhancers and silencers, also help to regulate the frequency with which pre-mRNA is synthesized from a gene.
Enhancers and silencers affect the efficiency of transcription but are not necessary for transcription to proceed.

Promoter Structures for RNA Polymerases I and III
The processes of bringing RNA polymerases I and III to the DNA template involve slightly less complex collections
of transcription factors, but the general theme is the same.

The conserved promoter elements for genes transcribed by polymerases I and III differ from those transcribed by
RNA polymerase II. RNA polymerase I transcribes genes that have two GC-rich promoter sequences in the -45 to
+20 region. These sequences alone are sufficient for transcription initiation to occur, but promoters with additional
sequences in the region from -180 to -105 upstream of the initiation site will further enhance initiation. Genes that
are transcribed by RNA polymerase III have upstream promoters or promoters that occur within the genes
themselves.

Eukaryotic transcription is a tightly regulated process that requires a variety of proteins to interact with each other
and with the DNA strand. Although the process of transcription in eukaryotes involves a greater metabolic
investment than in prokaryotes, it ensures that the cell transcribes precisely the pre-mRNAs that it needs for protein
402   15 • Genes and Proteins



      synthesis.



              EVOLUTION CONNECTION

      The Evolution of Promoters
      The evolution of genes may be a familiar concept. Mutations can occur in genes during DNA replication, and the
      result may or may not be beneficial to the cell. By altering an enzyme, structural protein, or some other factor, the
      process of mutation can transform functions or physical features. However, eukaryotic promoters and other gene
      regulatory sequences may evolve as well. For instance, consider a gene that, over many generations, becomes more
      valuable to the cell. Maybe the gene encodes a structural protein that the cell needs to synthesize in abundance for
      a certain function. If this is the case, it would be beneficial to the cell for that gene’s promoter to recruit transcription
      factors more efficiently and increase gene expression.

      Scientists examining the evolution of promoter sequences have reported varying results. In part, this is because it is
      difficult to infer exactly where a eukaryotic promoter begins and ends. Some promoters occur within genes; others
      are located very far upstream, or even downstream, of the genes they are regulating. However, when researchers
      limited their examination to human core promoter sequences that were defined experimentally as sequences that
      bind the preinitiation complex, they found that promoters evolve even faster than protein-coding genes.

      It is still unclear how promoter evolution might correspond to the evolution of humans or other complex organisms.
      However, the evolution of a promoter to effectively make more or less of a given gene product is an intriguing
                                                            1
      alternative to the evolution of the genes themselves.


      Eukaryotic Elongation and Termination
      Following the formation of the preinitiation complex, the polymerase is released from the other transcription factors,
      and elongation is allowed to proceed as it does in prokaryotes with the polymerase synthesizing pre-mRNA in the 5'
      to 3' direction. As discussed previously, RNA polymerase II transcribes the major share of eukaryotic genes, so in
      this section we will focus on how this polymerase accomplishes elongation and termination.

      Although the enzymatic process of elongation is essentially the same in eukaryotes and prokaryotes, the DNA
      template is considerably more complex. When eukaryotic cells are not dividing, their genes exist as a diffuse mass
      of DNA and proteins called chromatin. The DNA is tightly packaged around charged histone proteins at repeated
      intervals. These DNA–histone complexes, collectively called nucleosomes, are regularly spaced and include 146
      nucleotides of DNA wound around eight histones like thread around a spool.

      For polynucleotide synthesis to occur, the transcription machinery needs to move histones out of the way every time
      it encounters a nucleosome. This is accomplished by a special protein complex called FACT, which stands for
      “facilitates chromatin transcription.” This complex pulls histones away from the DNA template as the polymerase
      moves along it. Once the pre-mRNA is synthesized, the FACT complex replaces the histones to recreate the
      nucleosomes.

      The termination of transcription is different for the different polymerases. Unlike in prokaryotes, elongation by RNA
      polymerase II in eukaryotes takes place 1,000 to 2,000 nucleotides beyond the end of the gene being transcribed.
      This pre-mRNA tail is subsequently removed by cleavage during mRNA processing. On the other hand, RNA
      polymerases I and III require termination signals. Genes transcribed by RNA polymerase I contain a specific
      18-nucleotide sequence that is recognized by a termination protein. The process of termination in RNA polymerase
      III involves an mRNA hairpin similar to rho-independent termination of transcription in prokaryotes.




      1 H Liang et al., “Fast evolution of core promoters in primate genomes,” Molecular Biology and Evolution 25 (2008): 1239–44.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       15.4 • RNA Processing in Eukaryotes      403




15.4 RNA Processing in Eukaryotes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Describe the different steps in RNA processing
   • Understand the significance of exons, introns, and splicing for mRNAs
   • Explain how tRNAs and rRNAs are processed

After transcription, eukaryotic pre-mRNAs must undergo several processing steps before they can be translated.
Eukaryotic (and prokaryotic) tRNAs and rRNAs also undergo processing before they can function as components in
the protein-synthesis machinery.

mRNA Processing
The eukaryotic pre-mRNA undergoes extensive processing before it is ready to be translated. Eukaryotic protein-
coding sequences are not continuous, as they are in prokaryotes. The coding sequences (exons) are interrupted by
noncoding introns, which must be removed to make a translatable mRNA. The additional steps involved in
eukaryotic mRNA maturation also create a molecule with a much longer half-life than a prokaryotic mRNA.
Eukaryotic mRNAs last for several hours, whereas the typical E. coli mRNA lasts no more than five seconds.

Pre-mRNAs are first coated in RNA-stabilizing proteins; these protect the pre-mRNA from degradation while it is
processed and exported out of the nucleus. The three most important steps of pre-mRNA processing are the
addition of stabilizing and signaling factors at the 5' and 3' ends of the molecule, and the removal of the introns
(Figure 15.11). In rare cases, the mRNA transcript can be “edited” after it is transcribed.




FIGURE 15.11 Eukaryotic pre-mRNA processing. In addition to 5’ Cap and 3’ Poly-A Tail addition, introns must be precisely removed and
exons joined to generate a functional mRNA. Nucleotides upstream (towards the 5’cap) of the translation START codon are part of the 5’
untranslated region (5’ UTR). Nucleotides downstream (towards 3’end) of the STOP codon form the 3’ UTR. Both 5’ and 3’ UTRs are
important for regulating translation initiation and mRNA stability. Credit: Rao, A., Ryan, K. Fletcher, S. and Tag, A. Department of Biology,
Texas A&M University.



        EVOLUTION CONNECTION

RNA Editing in Trypanosomes
The trypanosomes are a group of protozoa that include the pathogen Trypanosoma brucei, which causes nagana in
cattle and sleeping sickness in humans throughout great areas of Africa (Figure 15.12). The trypanosome is carried
by biting flies in the genus Glossina (commonly called tsetse flies). Trypanosomes, and virtually all other eukaryotes,
have organelles called mitochondria that supply the cell with chemical energy. Mitochondria are organelles that
express their own DNA and are believed to be the remnants of a symbiotic relationship between a eukaryote and an
engulfed prokaryote. The mitochondrial DNA of trypanosomes exhibit an interesting exception to the central dogma:
their pre-mRNAs do not have the correct information to specify a functional protein. Usually, this is because the
mRNA is missing several U nucleotides. The cell performs an additional RNA processing step called RNA editing to
remedy this.
404   15 • Genes and Proteins




      FIGURE 15.12 Trypanosoma brucei is the causative agent of sleeping sickness in humans. The mRNAs of this pathogen must be modified
      by the addition of nucleotides before protein synthesis can occur. (credit: modification of work by Torsten Ochsenreiter)

      Other genes in the mitochondrial genome encode 40- to 80-nucleotide guide RNAs. One or more of these molecules
      interacts by complementary base pairing with some of the nucleotides in the pre-mRNA transcript. However, the
      guide RNA has more A nucleotides than the pre-mRNA has U nucleotides with which to bind. In these regions, the
      guide RNA loops out. The 3' ends of guide RNAs have a long poly-U tail, and these U bases are inserted in regions of
      the pre-mRNA transcript at which the guide RNAs are looped. This process is entirely mediated by RNA molecules.
      That is, guide RNAs—rather than proteins—serve as the catalysts in RNA editing.

      RNA editing is not just a phenomenon of trypanosomes. In the mitochondria of some plants, almost all pre-mRNAs
      are edited. RNA editing has also been identified in mammals such as rats, rabbits, and even humans. What could be
      the evolutionary reason for this additional step in pre-mRNA processing? One possibility is that the mitochondria,
      being remnants of ancient prokaryotes, have an equally ancient RNA-based method for regulating gene expression.
      In support of this hypothesis, edits made to pre-mRNAs differ depending on cellular conditions. Although
      speculative, the process of RNA editing may be a holdover from a primordial time when RNA molecules, instead of
      proteins, were responsible for catalyzing reactions.


      5' Capping
      While the pre-mRNA is still being synthesized, a 7-methylguanosine cap is added to the 5' end of the growing
      transcript by a phosphate linkage. This functional group protects the nascent mRNA from degradation. In addition,
      factors involved in protein synthesis recognize the cap to help initiate translation by ribosomes.

      3' Poly-A Tail
      Once elongation is complete, the pre-mRNA is cleaved by an endonuclease between an AAUAAA consensus
      sequence and a GU-rich sequence, leaving the AAUAAA sequence on the pre-mRNA. An enzyme called poly-A
      polymerase then adds a string of approximately 200 A residues, called the poly-A tail. This modification further
      protects the pre-mRNA from degradation and is also the binding site for a protein necessary for exporting the
      processed mRNA to the cytoplasm.

      Pre-mRNA Splicing
      Eukaryotic genes are composed of exons, which correspond to protein-coding sequences (ex-on signifies that they
      are expressed), and intervening sequences called introns (int-ron denotes their intervening role), which may be
      involved in gene regulation but are removed from the pre-mRNA during processing. Intron sequences in mRNA do
      not encode functional proteins.

      The discovery of introns came as a surprise to researchers in the 1970s who expected that pre-mRNAs would
      specify protein sequences without further processing, as they had observed in prokaryotes. The genes of higher
      eukaryotes very often contain one or more introns. These regions may correspond to regulatory sequences;
      however, the biological significance of having many introns or having very long introns in a gene is unclear. It is
      possible that introns slow down gene expression because it takes longer to transcribe pre-mRNAs with lots of



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  15.4 • RNA Processing in Eukaryotes       405



introns. Alternatively, introns may be nonfunctional sequence remnants left over from the fusion of ancient genes
throughout the course of evolution. This is supported by the fact that separate exons often encode separate protein
subunits or domains. For the most part, the sequences of introns can be mutated without ultimately affecting the
protein product.

All of a pre-mRNA’s introns must be completely and precisely removed before protein synthesis. If the process errs
by even a single nucleotide, the reading frame of the rejoined exons would shift, and the resulting protein would be
dysfunctional. The process of removing introns and reconnecting exons is called splicing (Figure 15.13). Introns are
removed and degraded while the pre-mRNA is still in the nucleus. Splicing occurs by a sequence-specific
mechanism that ensures introns will be removed and exons rejoined with the accuracy and precision of a single
nucleotide. Although the intron itself is noncoding, the beginning and end of each intron is marked with specific
nucleotides: GU at the 5' end and AG at the 3' end of the intron. The splicing of pre-mRNAs is conducted by
complexes of proteins and RNA molecules called spliceosomes.



        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 15.13 Pre-mRNA splicing involves the precise removal of introns from the primary RNA transcript. The splicing process is catalyzed
by protein complexes called spliceosomes that are composed of proteins and RNA molecules called small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs).
Spliceosomes recognize sequences at the 5' and 3' end of the intron. Rao, A. and Ryan, K. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

Errors in splicing are implicated in cancers and other human diseases. What kinds of mutations might lead to
splicing errors? Think of different possible outcomes if splicing errors occur.


Note that more than 70 individual introns can be present, and each has to undergo the process of splicing—in
addition to 5' capping and the addition of a poly-A tail—just to generate a single, translatable mRNA molecule.

     LINK TO LEARNING
See how introns are removed during RNA splicing at this website (https://openstax.org/l/RNA_splicing).


Processing of tRNAs and rRNAs
The tRNAs and rRNAs are structural molecules that have roles in protein synthesis; however, these RNAs are not
themselves translated. Pre-rRNAs are transcribed, processed, and assembled into ribosomes in the nucleolus. Pre-
tRNAs are transcribed and processed in the nucleus and then released into the cytoplasm where they are linked to
free amino acids for protein synthesis.

Most of the tRNAs and rRNAs in eukaryotes and prokaryotes are first transcribed as a long precursor molecule that
spans multiple rRNAs or tRNAs. Enzymes then cleave the precursors into subunits corresponding to each structural
RNA. Some of the bases of pre-rRNAs are methylated; that is, a –CH3 methyl functional group is added for stability.
Pre-tRNA molecules also undergo methylation. As with pre-mRNAs, subunit excision occurs in eukaryotic pre-RNAs
destined to become tRNAs or rRNAs.
406   15 • Genes and Proteins



      Mature rRNAs make up approximately 50 percent of each ribosome. Some of a ribosome’s RNA molecules are
      purely structural, whereas others have catalytic or binding activities. Mature tRNAs take on a three-dimensional
      structure through local regions of base pairing stabilized by intramolecular hydrogen bonding. The tRNA folds to
      position the amino acid binding site at one end and the anticodon at the other end (Figure 15.14). The anticodon is
      a three-nucleotide sequence in a tRNA that interacts with an mRNA codon through complementary base pairing.




      FIGURE 15.14 This is a space-filling model of a tRNA molecule that adds the amino acid phenylalanine to a growing polypeptide chain. The
      anticodon AAG binds the Codon UUC on the mRNA. The amino acid phenylalanine is attached to the other end of the tRNA.

      15.5 Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe the different steps in protein synthesis
         • Discuss the role of ribosomes in protein synthesis

      The synthesis of proteins consumes more of a cell’s energy than any other metabolic process. In turn, proteins
      account for more mass than any other component of living organisms (with the exception of water), and proteins
      perform virtually every function of a cell. The process of translation, or protein synthesis, involves the decoding of an
      mRNA message into a polypeptide product. Amino acids are covalently strung together by interlinking peptide
      bonds in lengths ranging from approximately 50 to more than 1000 amino acid residues. Each individual amino acid
      has an amino group (NH2) and a carboxyl (COOH) group. Polypeptides are formed when the amino group of one
      amino acid forms an amide (i.e., peptide) bond with the carboxyl group of another amino acid (Figure 15.15). This
      reaction is catalyzed by ribosomes and generates one water molecule.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              15.5 • Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis   407




FIGURE 15.15 A peptide bond links the carboxyl end of one amino acid with the amino end of another, producing one water molecule
during the process. For simplicity in this image, only the functional groups involved in the peptide bond are shown. The R and R'
designations refer to the rest of each amino acid structure.

The Protein Synthesis Machinery
In addition to the mRNA template, many molecules and macromolecules contribute to the process of translation.
The composition of each component may vary across species; for example, ribosomes may consist of different
numbers of rRNAs and polypeptides depending on the organism. However, the general structures and functions of
the protein synthesis machinery are comparable from bacteria to human cells. Translation requires the input of an
mRNA template, ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymatic factors. (Note: A ribosome can be thought of as an
enzyme whose amino acid binding sites are specified by mRNA.)

     LINK TO LEARNING
Click through the steps of this PBS interactive (https://openstax.org/l/prokary_protein) to see protein synthesis in
action.


Ribosomes
Even before an mRNA is translated, a cell must invest energy to build each of its ribosomes. In E. coli, there are
between 10,000 and 70,000 ribosomes present in each cell at any given time. A ribosome is a complex
macromolecule composed of structural and catalytic rRNAs, and many distinct polypeptides. In eukaryotes, the
nucleolus is completely specialized for the synthesis and assembly of rRNAs.

Ribosomes exist in the cytoplasm of prokaryotes and in the cytoplasm and rough endoplasmic reticulum of
eukaryotes. Mitochondria and chloroplasts also have their own ribosomes in the matrix and stroma, which look
more similar to prokaryotic ribosomes (and have similar drug sensitivities) than the ribosomes just outside their
outer membranes in the cytoplasm. Ribosomes dissociate into large and small subunits when they are not
synthesizing proteins and reassociate during the initiation of translation. In E. coli, the small subunit is described as
30S, and the large subunit is 50S, for a total of 70S (recall that Svedberg units are not additive). Mammalian
ribosomes have a small 40S subunit and a large 60S subunit, for a total of 80S. The small subunit is responsible for
binding the mRNA template, whereas the large subunit sequentially binds tRNAs. Each mRNA molecule is
simultaneously translated by many ribosomes, all synthesizing protein in the same direction: reading the mRNA
from 5' to 3' and synthesizing the polypeptide from the N terminus to the C terminus. The complete mRNA/poly-
ribosome structure is called a polysome.

tRNAs
The tRNAs are structural RNA molecules that were transcribed from genes by RNA polymerase III. Depending on
the species, 40 to 60 types of tRNAs exist in the cytoplasm. Transfer RNAs serve as adaptor molecules. Each tRNA
carries a specific amino acid and recognizes one or more of the mRNA codons that define the order of amino acids in
a protein. Aminoacyl-tRNAs bind to the ribosome and add the corresponding amino acid to the polypeptide chain.
Therefore, tRNAs are the molecules that actually “translate” the language of RNA into the language of proteins.

Of the 64 possible mRNA codons—or triplet combinations of A, U, G, and C—three specify the termination of protein
408   15 • Genes and Proteins



      synthesis and 61 specify the addition of amino acids to the polypeptide chain. Of these 61, one codon (AUG) also
      encodes the initiation of translation. Each tRNA anticodon can base pair with one or more of the mRNA codons for
      its amino acid. For instance, if the sequence CUA occurred on an mRNA template in the proper reading frame, it
      would bind a leucine tRNA expressing the complementary sequence, GAU. The ability of some tRNAs to match more
      than one codon is what gives the genetic code its blocky structure.

      As the adaptor molecules of translation, it is surprising that tRNAs can fit so much specificity into such a small
      package. Consider that tRNAs need to interact with three factors: 1) they must be recognized by the correct
      aminoacyl synthetase (see below); 2) they must be recognized by ribosomes; and 3) they must bind to the correct
      sequence in mRNA.




      FIGURE 15.16 The ribosome and its function. The ribosome is responsible for translating the mRNA into protein. A. The ribosome consists
      of a large and small ribosomal subunit. Assembly of the subunits on the mRNA forms three tRNA binding sites. B. During translation,
      charged tRNAs enter the Acceptor site, and the anticodon on the tRNA base pairs with the codon in the mRNA. After the incoming amino
      acid forms a peptide bond with the growing polypeptide chain, the ribosome will move three nucleotides toward the 3’ end of the mRNA.
      This movement will transfer the tRNA with the growing polypeptide to the Peptidyl-tRNA binding site and allow the empty tRNA to exit at
      the Exit site. Credit: Rao, A., Ryan, K. and Fletcher, S. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

      Aminoacyl tRNA Synthetases
      The process of pre-tRNA synthesis by RNA polymerase III only creates the RNA portion of the adaptor molecule.
      The corresponding amino acid must be added later, once the tRNA is processed and exported to the cytoplasm.
      Through the process of tRNA “charging,” each tRNA molecule is linked to its correct amino acid by one of a group of
      enzymes called aminoacyl tRNA synthetases. At least one type of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase exists for each of the
      20 amino acids; the exact number of aminoacyl tRNA synthetases varies by species. These enzymes first bind and



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  15.5 • Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis       409



hydrolyze ATP to catalyze a high-energy bond between an amino acid and adenosine monophosphate (AMP); a
pyrophosphate molecule is expelled in this reaction. The activated amino acid is then transferred to the tRNA, and
AMP is released. The term "charging" is appropriate, since the high-energy bond that attaches an amino acid to its
tRNA is later used to drive the formation of the peptide bond. Each tRNA is named for its amino acid.




FIGURE 15.17 Charging of tRNAs with correct amino acids. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases catalyze covalent bond formation between the
tRNA and the correct amino acid in preparation for translation. Because there are multiple amino acids, there are multiple different tRNA
synthetases. All of the synthetases require energy, in the form of ATP, to make sure the correct amino acid is attached to the tRNA with the
correct anticodon sequence. Credit: Rao, A., Ryan, K. and Tag, A. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

The Mechanism of Protein Synthesis
As with mRNA synthesis, protein synthesis can be divided into three phases: initiation, elongation, and termination.
The process of translation is similar in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Here we’ll explore how translation occurs in E.
coli, a representative prokaryote, and specify any differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic translation.

Initiation of Translation
Protein synthesis begins with the formation of an initiation complex. In E. coli, this complex involves the small 30S
ribosome, the mRNA template, three initiation factors (IFs; IF-1, IF-2, and IF-3), and a special initiator tRNA, called
tRNAfMet.

In E. coli mRNA, a sequence upstream of the first AUG codon, called the Shine-Dalgarno sequence (AGGAGG),
interacts with the rRNA molecules that compose the ribosome. This interaction anchors the 30S ribosomal subunit
at the correct location on the mRNA template. Guanosine triphosphate (GTP), which is a purine nucleotide
triphosphate, acts as an energy source during translation—both at the start of elongation and during the ribosome’s
translocation. Binding of the mRNA to the 30S ribosome also requires IF-3.

The initiator tRNA then interacts with the start codon AUG (or rarely, GUG). This tRNA carries the amino acid
methionine, which is formylated after its attachment to the tRNA. The formylation creates a "faux" peptide bond
between the formyl carboxyl group and the amino group of the methionine. Binding of the fMet-tRNAfMet is
mediated by the initiation factor IF-2. The fMet begins every polypeptide chain synthesized by E. coli, but it is
usually removed after translation is complete. When an in-frame AUG is encountered during translation elongation,
a non-formylated methionine is inserted by a regular Met-tRNAMet. After the formation of the initiation complex, the
410   15 • Genes and Proteins



      30S ribosomal subunit is joined by the 50S subunit to form the translation complex. In eukaryotes, a similar
      initiation complex forms, comprising mRNA, the 40S small ribosomal subunit, eukaryotic IFs, and nucleoside
      triphosphates (GTP and ATP). The methionine on the charged initiator tRNA, called Met-tRNAi, is not formylated.
      However, Met-tRNAi is distinct from other Met-tRNAs in that it can bind IFs.

      Instead of depositing at the Shine-Dalgarno sequence, the eukaryotic initiation complex recognizes the
      7-methylguanosine cap at the 5' end of the mRNA. A cap-binding protein (CBP) and several other IFs assist the
      movement of the ribosome to the 5' cap. Once at the cap, the initiation complex tracks along the mRNA in the 5' to
      3' direction, searching for the AUG start codon. Many eukaryotic mRNAs are translated from the first AUG, but this is
      not always the case. According to Kozak’s rules, the nucleotides around the AUG indicate whether it is the correct
      start codon. Kozak’s rules state that the following consensus sequence must appear around the AUG of vertebrate
      genes: 5'-gccRccAUGG-3'. The R (for purine) indicates a site that can be either A or G, but cannot be C or U.
      Essentially, the closer the sequence is to this consensus, the higher the efficiency of translation.

      Once the appropriate AUG is identified, the other proteins and CBP dissociate, and the 60S subunit binds to the
      complex of Met-tRNAi, mRNA, and the 40S subunit. This step completes the initiation of translation in eukaryotes.

      Translation, Elongation, and Termination
      In prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the basics of elongation are the same, so we will review elongation from the
      perspective of E. coli. When the translation complex is formed, the tRNA binding region of the ribosome consists of
      three compartments. The A (aminoacyl) site binds incoming charged aminoacyl tRNAs. The P (peptidyl) site binds
      charged tRNAs carrying amino acids that have formed peptide bonds with the growing polypeptide chain but have
      not yet dissociated from their corresponding tRNA. The E (exit) site releases dissociated tRNAs so that they can be
      recharged with free amino acids. The initiating methionyl-tRNA, however, occupies the P site at the beginning of the
      elongation phase of translation in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

      During translation elongation, the mRNA template provides tRNA binding specificity. As the ribosome moves along
      the mRNA, each mRNA codon comes into register, and specific binding with the corresponding charged tRNA
      anticodon is ensured. If mRNA were not present in the elongation complex, the ribosome would bind tRNAs
      nonspecifically and randomly.

      Elongation proceeds with charged tRNAs sequentially entering and leaving the ribosome as each new amino acid is
      added to the polypeptide chain. Movement of a tRNA from A to P to E site is induced by conformational changes that
      advance the ribosome by three bases in the 3' direction. The energy for each step along the ribosome is donated by
      elongation factors that hydrolyze GTP. GTP energy is required both for the binding of a new aminoacyl-tRNA to the A
      site and for its translocation to the P site after formation of the peptide bond. Peptide bonds form between the
      amino group of the amino acid attached to the A-site tRNA and the carboxyl group of the amino acid attached to the
      P-site tRNA. The formation of each peptide bond is catalyzed by peptidyl transferase, an RNA-based enzyme that is
      integrated into the 50S ribosomal subunit. The energy for each peptide bond formation is derived from the high-
      energy bond linking each amino acid to its tRNA. After peptide bond formation, the A-site tRNA that now holds the
      growing peptide chain moves to the P site, and the P-site tRNA that is now empty moves to the E site and is expelled
      from the ribosome (Figure 15.18). Amazingly, the E. coli translation apparatus takes only 0.05 seconds to add each
      amino acid, meaning that a 200-amino-acid protein can be translated in just 10 seconds.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             15.5 • Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis     411




        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 15.18 Translation begins when an initiator tRNA anticodon recognizes a start codon on mRNA bound to a small ribosomal subunit.
The large ribosomal subunit joins the small subunit, and a second tRNA is recruited. As the mRNA moves relative to the ribosome,
successive tRNAs move through the ribosome and the polypeptide chain is formed. Entry of a release factor into the A site terminates
translation and the components dissociate.

Many antibiotics inhibit bacterial protein synthesis. For example, tetracycline blocks the A site on the bacterial
ribosome, and chloramphenicol blocks peptidyl transfer. What specific effect would you expect each of these
antibiotics to have on protein synthesis?

Tetracycline would directly affect:

  a. tRNA binding to the ribosome
  b. ribosome assembly
  c. growth of the protein chain

Chloramphenicol would directly affect:

  a. tRNA binding to the ribosome
  b. ribosome assembly
  c. growth of the protein chain


Termination of translation occurs when a nonsense codon (UAA, UAG, or UGA) is encountered. Upon aligning with
the A site, these nonsense codons are recognized by protein release factors that resemble tRNAs. The releasing
factors in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes instruct peptidyl transferase to add a water molecule to the carboxyl end
of the P-site amino acid. This reaction forces the P-site amino acid to detach from its tRNA, and the newly made
protein is released. The small and large ribosomal subunits dissociate from the mRNA and from each other; they are
recruited almost immediately into another translation initiation complex. After many ribosomes have completed
translation, the mRNA is degraded so the nucleotides can be reused in another transcription reaction.
412   15 • Genes and Proteins




      FIGURE 15.19 Translation Termination is Active. Translation is terminated when a STOP codon is in the A-site of the ribosome. Since there
      are no tRNAs corresponding to the STOP codons, the Release Factor protein enters and catalyzes the hydrolysis between the last amino
      acid and its tRNA. This hydrolysis releases the free carboxyl terminus (C-term) of the protein. Additional factors use the energy in GTP
      hydrolysis to disassemble the large and small ribosomal subunits and mRNA. Credit: Rao, A. and Ryan, K. Department of Biology, Texas
      A&M University.

      Protein Folding, Modification, and Targeting
      During and after translation, individual amino acids may be chemically modified, signal sequences appended, and
      the new protein “folded” into a distinct three-dimensional structure as a result of intramolecular interactions. A
      signal sequence is a short sequence at the amino end of a protein that directs it to a specific cellular compartment.
      These sequences can be thought of as the protein’s “train ticket” to its ultimate destination, and are recognized by
      signal-recognition proteins that act as conductors. For instance, a specific signal sequence terminus will direct a
      protein to the mitochondria or chloroplasts (in plants). Once the protein reaches its cellular destination, the signal
      sequence is usually clipped off.

      Many proteins fold spontaneously, but some proteins require helper molecules, called chaperones, to prevent them
      from aggregating during the complicated process of folding. Even if a protein is properly specified by its
      corresponding mRNA, it could take on a completely dysfunctional shape if abnormal temperature or pH conditions
      prevent it from folding correctly.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   15.5 • Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis      413




FIGURE 15.20 Proteins are co-translationally targeted into the ER for secretion. Proteins that will be secreted from the cell will contain a
signal sequence at the N-terminus. The signal will be recognized by SRP as soon as the amino acids emerge from the ribosome, and the
ribosome will be targeted to the translocation channel in the ER membrane. The rest of the protein will go directly from the ribosome,
across the ER membrane and into the ER lumen. From the ER, proteins can be secreted from the cell via vesicle trafficking. Credit: Rao, A.
and Ryan, K. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.
414   15 • Key Terms




Key Terms
7-methylguanosine cap modification added to the 5'          initiator tRNA in prokaryotes, called              ; in
   end of pre-mRNAs to protect mRNA from                       eukaryotes, called tRNAi; a tRNA that interacts with
   degradation and assist translation                          a start codon, binds directly to the ribosome P site,
aminoacyl tRNA synthetase enzyme that “charges”                and links to a special methionine to begin a
   tRNA molecules by catalyzing a bond between the             polypeptide chain
   tRNA and a corresponding amino acid                      intron non–protein-coding intervening sequences
anticodon three-nucleotide sequence in a tRNA                  that are spliced from mRNA during processing
   molecule that corresponds to an mRNA codon               Kozak’s rules determines the correct initiation AUG
CAAT box (GGCCAATCT) essential eukaryotic                      in a eukaryotic mRNA; the following consensus
   promoter sequence involved in binding transcription         sequence must appear around the AUG: 5’-
   factors                                                     GCC(purine)CCAUGG-3’;
                                                                            underline
                                                                                 end underline
                                                                                          the bolded bases are most
central dogma states that genes specify the                    important
   sequence of mRNAs, which in turn specify the             nonsense codon one of the three mRNA codons that
   sequence of proteins                                        specifies termination of translation
codon three consecutive nucleotides in mRNA that            nontemplate strand strand of DNA that is not used to
   specify the insertion of an amino acid or the release       transcribe mRNA; this strand is identical to the
   of a polypeptide chain during translation                   mRNA except that T nucleotides in the DNA are
colinear in terms of RNA and protein, three “units” of         replaced by U nucleotides in the mRNA
   RNA (nucleotides) specify one “unit” of protein          Octamer box (ATTTGCAT) nonessential eukaryotic
   (amino acid) in a consecutive fashion                       promoter sequence that binds cellular factors to
consensus DNA sequence that is used by many                    increase the efficiency of transcription; may be
   species to perform the same or similar functions            present several times in a promoter
core enzyme prokaryotic RNA polymerase consisting           peptidyl transferase RNA-based enzyme that is
   of α, α, β, and β' but missing σ; this complex              integrated into the 50S ribosomal subunit and
   performs elongation                                         catalyzes the formation of peptide bonds
degeneracy (of the genetic code) describes that a           plasmid extrachromosomal, covalently closed,
   given amino acid can be encoded by more than one            circular DNA molecule that may only contain one or
   nucleotide triplet; the code is degenerate, but not         a few genes; common in prokaryotes
   ambiguous                                                poly-A tail modification added to the 3' end of pre-
downstream nucleotides following the initiation site           mRNAs to protect mRNA from degradation and
   in the direction of mRNA transcription; in general,         assist mRNA export from the nucleus
   sequences that are toward the 3' end relative to a       polysome mRNA molecule simultaneously being
   site on the mRNA                                            translated by many ribosomes all going in the same
exon sequence present in protein-coding mRNA after             direction
   completion of pre-mRNA splicing                          preinitiation complex cluster of transcription factors
FACT complex that “facilitates chromatin                       and other proteins that recruit RNA polymerase II
   transcription” by disassembling nucleosomes ahead           for transcription of a DNA template
   of a transcribing RNA polymerase II and                  promoter DNA sequence to which RNA polymerase
   reassembling them after the polymerase passes by            and associated factors bind and initiate
GC-rich box (GGCG) nonessential eukaryotic                     transcription
   promoter sequence that binds cellular factors to         reading frame sequence of triplet codons in mRNA
   increase the efficiency of transcription; may be            that specify a particular protein; a ribosome shift of
   present several times in a promoter                         one or two nucleotides in either direction
hairpin structure of RNA when it folds back on itself          completely abolishes synthesis of that protein
   and forms intramolecular hydrogen bonds between          rho-dependent termination in prokaryotes,
   complementary nucleotides                                   termination of transcription by an interaction
holoenzyme prokaryotic RNA polymerase consisting               between RNA polymerase and the rho protein at a
   of α, α, β, β', and σ; this complex is responsible for      run of G nucleotides on the DNA template
   transcription initiation                                 rho-independent termination sequence-dependent
initiation site nucleotide from which mRNA synthesis           termination of prokaryotic mRNA synthesis; caused
   proceeds in the 5' to 3' direction; denoted with a          by hairpin formation in the mRNA that stalls the
   “+1”



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          15 • Chapter Summary   415



   polymerase                                                   reconnecting exons in a pre-mRNA
RNA editing direct alteration of one or more                 start codon AUG (or rarely, GUG) on an mRNA from
   nucleotides in an mRNA that has already been                 which translation begins; always specifies
   synthesized                                                  methionine
Shine-Dalgarno sequence (AGGAGG); initiates                  TATA box conserved promoter sequence in
   prokaryotic translation by interacting with rRNA             eukaryotes and prokaryotes that helps to establish
   molecules comprising the 30S ribosome                        the initiation site for transcription
signal sequence short tail of amino acids that directs       template strand strand of DNA that specifies the
   a protein to a specific cellular compartment                 complementary mRNA molecule
small nuclear RNA molecules synthesized by RNA               transcription bubble region of locally unwound DNA
   polymerase III that have a variety of functions,             that allows for transcription of mRNA
   including splicing pre-mRNAs and regulating               upstream nucleotides preceding the initiation site; in
   transcription factors                                        general, sequences toward the 5' end relative to a
splicing process of removing introns and                        site on the mRNA

Chapter Summary
15.1 The Genetic Code                                        promoter sequences that are usually located upstream
                                                             of the gene being copied. The mRNA is synthesized in
The genetic code refers to the DNA alphabet (A, T, C,
                                                             the 5' to 3' direction, and the FACT complex moves and
G), the RNA alphabet (A, U, C, G), and the polypeptide
                                                             reassembles nucleosomes as the polymerase passes
alphabet (20 amino acids). The central dogma
                                                             by. Whereas RNA polymerases I and III terminate
describes the flow of genetic information in the cell
                                                             transcription by protein- or RNA hairpin-dependent
from genes to mRNA to proteins. Genes are used to
                                                             methods, RNA polymerase II transcribes for 1,000 or
make mRNA by the process of transcription; mRNA is
                                                             more nucleotides beyond the gene template and
used to synthesize proteins by the process of
                                                             cleaves the excess during pre-mRNA processing.
translation. The genetic code is degenerate because 64
triplet codons in mRNA specify only 20 amino acids           15.4 RNA Processing in Eukaryotes
and three nonsense codons. Most amino acids have
                                                             Eukaryotic pre-mRNAs are modified with a 5'
several similar codons. Almost every species on the
                                                             methylguanosine cap and a poly-A tail. These
planet uses the same genetic code.
                                                             structures protect the mature mRNA from degradation
15.2 Prokaryotic Transcription                               and help export it from the nucleus. Pre-mRNAs also
                                                             undergo splicing, in which introns are removed and
In prokaryotes, mRNA synthesis is initiated at a
                                                             exons are reconnected with single-nucleotide
promoter sequence on the DNA template comprising
                                                             accuracy. Only finished mRNAs that have undergone 5'
two consensus sequences that recruit RNA
                                                             capping, 3' polyadenylation, and intron splicing are
polymerase. The prokaryotic polymerase consists of a
                                                             exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Pre-
core enzyme of four protein subunits and a σ protein
                                                             rRNAs and pre-tRNAs may be processed by
that assists only with initiation. Elongation synthesizes
                                                             intramolecular cleavage, splicing, methylation, and
mRNA in the 5' to 3' direction at a rate of 40
                                                             chemical conversion of nucleotides. Rarely, RNA
nucleotides per second. Termination liberates the
                                                             editing is also performed to insert missing bases after
mRNA and occurs either by rho protein interaction or
                                                             an mRNA has been synthesized.
by the formation of an mRNA hairpin.
                                                             15.5 Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis
15.3 Eukaryotic Transcription
                                                             The players in translation include the mRNA template,
Transcription in eukaryotes involves one of three types
                                                             ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymatic factors. The
of polymerases, depending on the gene being
                                                             small ribosomal subunit binds to the mRNA template
transcribed. RNA polymerase II transcribes all of the
                                                             either at the Shine-Dalgarno sequence (prokaryotes) or
protein-coding genes, whereas RNA polymerase I
                                                             the 5' cap (eukaryotes). Translation begins at the
transcribes the tandemly duplicated rRNA genes, and
                                                             initiating AUG on the mRNA, specifying methionine.
RNA polymerase III transcribes various small RNAs,
                                                             The formation of peptide bonds occurs between
like the 5S rRNA, tRNA, and small nuclear RNA genes.
                                                             sequential amino acids matched to the mRNA template
The initiation of transcription in eukaryotes involves the
                                                             by their tRNAs according to the genetic code. Charged
binding of several transcription factors to complex
                                                             tRNAs enter the ribosomal A site, and their amino acid
416   15 • Visual Connection Questions



bonds with the amino acid at the P site. The entire       release factor binds and dissociates the components
mRNA is translated in three-nucleotide “steps” of the     and frees the new protein. Folding of the protein occurs
ribosome. When a nonsense codon is encountered, a         during and after translation.

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 15.11 A scientist splices a eukaryotic             chloramphenicol blocks peptidyl transfer. What
      promoter in front of a bacterial gene and inserts         specific effect would you expect each of these
      the gene in a bacterial chromosome. Would you             antibiotics to have on protein synthesis?
      expect the bacteria to transcribe the gene?               Tetracycline would directly affect:
                                                                  a. tRNA binding to the ribosome
   2. Figure 15.13 Errors in splicing are implicated in
                                                                  b. ribosome assembly
      cancers and other human diseases. What kinds
                                                                  c. growth of the protein chain
      of mutations might lead to splicing errors? Think
      of different possible outcomes if splicing errors         Chloramphenicol would directly affect
      occur.                                                      a. tRNA binding to the ribosome
                                                                  b. ribosome assembly
   3. Figure 15.18 Many antibiotics inhibit bacterial
                                                                  c. growth of the protein chain
      protein synthesis. For example, tetracycline
      blocks the A site on the bacterial ribosome, and

Review Questions
   4. The AUC and AUA codons in mRNA both specify               promoters are called consensus sequences
      isoleucine. What feature of the genetic code              because ________.
      explains this?                                              a. they are identical in all bacterial species
        a. complementarity                                        b. they are similar in all bacterial species
        b. nonsense codons                                        c. they exist in all organisms
        c. universality                                           d. they have the same function in all
        d. degeneracy                                                organisms

   5. How many nucleotides are in 12 mRNA codons?            9. Three different bacteria species have the following
       a. 12                                                    consensus sequences upstream of a conserved gene.
       b. 24
        c. 36                                                                   Species A      Species B     Species C
       d. 48
                                                                     -10         TAATAAT        TTTAAT         TATATT
   6. Which event contradicts the central dogma of
      molecular biology?                                             -35         TTGACA         TTGGCC        TTGAAA
       a. Poly-A polymerase enzymes process
                                                                TABLE 15.2
           mRNA in the nucleus.
       b. Endonuclease enzymes splice out and                   Order the bacteria from most to least efficient initiation
           repair damaged DNA.                                  of gene transcription.
       c. Scientists use reverse transcriptase                    a. A > B > C
           enzymes to make DNA from RNA.                          b. B > C > A
       d. Codons specifying amino acids are                        c. C > B > A
           degenerate and universal.                              d. A > C > B

   7. Which subunit of the E. coli polymerase confers      10. Which feature of promoters can be found in both
      specificity to transcription?                            prokaryotes and eukaryotes?
        a. α                                                     a. GC box
        b. β                                                     b. TATA box
        c. β'                                                    c. octamer box
        d. σ                                                     d. -10 and -35 sequences

   8. The -10 and -35 regions of prokaryotic               11. What transcripts will be most affected by low



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         15 • Critical Thinking Questions   417



     levels of α-amanitin?
       a. 18S and 28S rRNAs
       b. pre-mRNAs                                       What is the predicted size of the corresponding
       c. 5S rRNAs and tRNAs                              mature mRNA in base pairs (bp), excluding the
       d. other small nuclear RNAs                        5’ cap and 3’ poly-A tail?
                                                            a. 220bp
 12. How do enhancers and promoters differ?                 b. 295bp
      a. Enhancers bind transcription factors to             c. 140bp
          silence gene expression, while promoters          d. 435bp
          activate transcription.
      b. Enhancers increase the efficiency of gene    16. The RNA components of ribosomes are
          expression, but are not essential for           synthesized in the ________.
          transcription. Promoter recognition is            a. cytoplasm
          essential to transcription initiation.            b. nucleus
       c. Promoters bind transcription factors to           c. nucleolus
          increase the efficiency of transcription.         d. endoplasmic reticulum
          Enhancers bind RNA polymerases to
          initiate transcription.                     17. In any given species, there are at least how
      d. There is no difference. Both are                 many types of aminoacyl tRNA synthetases?
          transcription factor-binding sequences in         a. 20
          DNA.                                              b. 40
                                                            c. 100
 13. Which pre-mRNA processing step is important            d. 200
     for initiating translation?
       a. poly-A tail                                 18. A scientist introduces a mutation that makes the
       b. RNA editing                                     60S ribosomal subunit nonfunctional in a human
       c. splicing                                        cell line. What would be the predicted effect on
       d. 7-methylguanosine cap                           translation?
                                                            a. Translation stalls after the initiation AUG
 14. What processing step enhances the stability of               codon is identified.
     pre-tRNAs and pre-rRNAs?                               b. The ribosome cannot catalyze the
       a. methylation                                             formation of peptide bonds between the
       b. nucleotide modification                                 tRNAs in the A and P sites.
       c. cleavage                                           c. The ribosome cannot interact with
       d. splicing                                                mRNAs.
                                                            d. tRNAs cannot exit the E site of the
 15. A scientist identifies a pre-mRNA with the                   ribosome.
     following structure.

Critical Thinking Questions
 19. Imagine if there were 200 commonly occurring         strand and the DNA template strand is
     amino acids instead of 20. Given what you know       complementary to the DNA nontemplate strand,
     about the genetic code, what would be the            then why are base sequences of mRNA and the
     shortest possible codon length? Explain.             DNA nontemplate strand not identical? Could
                                                          they ever be?
 20. Discuss how degeneracy of the genetic code
     makes cells more robust to mutations.            23. In your own words, describe the difference
                                                          between rho-dependent and rho-independent
 21. A scientist sequencing mRNA identifies the
                                                          termination of transcription in prokaryotes.
     following strand:
     CUAUGUGUCGUAACAGCCGAUGACCCG                      24. A fragment of bacterial DNA reads:
     What is the sequence of the amino acid chain         3’
     this mRNA makes when it is translated?               –TACCTATAATCTCAATTGATAGAAGCACTCTAC–
                                                          5’
 22. If mRNA is complementary to the DNA template
418   15 • Critical Thinking Questions



       Assuming that this fragment is the template        27. Transcribe and translate the following DNA
       strand, what is the sequence of mRNA that              sequence (nontemplate strand): 5'-
       would be transcribed? (Hint: Be sure to identify       ATGGCCGGTTATTAAGCA-3'
       the initiation site.)
                                                          28. Explain how single nucleotide changes can have
  25. A scientist observes that a cell has an RNA             vastly different effects on protein function.
      polymerase deficiency that prevents it from
                                                          29. A normal mRNA that reads 5’ –
      making proteins. Describe three additional
                                                              UGCCAUGGUAAUAACACAUGAGGCCUGAAC– 3’
      observations that would together support the
                                                              has an insertion mutation that changes the
      conclusion that a defect in RNA polymerase I
                                                              sequence to 5’
      activity, and not problems with the other
                                                              -UGCCAUGGUUAAUAACACAUGAGGCCUGAAC–
      polymerases, causes the defect.
                                                              3’. Translate the original mRNA and the mutated
  26. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients often             mRNA, and explain how insertion mutations can
      harbor nonsense mutations in their spliceosome          have dramatic effects on proteins. (Hint: Be sure
      machinery. Describe how this mutation of the            to find the initiation site.)
      spliceosome would change the final location and
      sequence of a pre-mRNA.




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 16
Gene Expression




FIGURE 16.1 The genetic content of each somatic cell in an organism is the same, but not all genes are expressed in
every cell. The control of which genes are expressed dictates whether a cell is, for example, (a) an eye cell or (b) a
liver cell. It is the differential gene expression patterns that arise in different cells that give rise to (c) a complete
organism.


CHAPTER OUTLINE
16.1 Regulation of Gene Expression
16.2 Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
16.3 Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation
16.4 Eukaryotic Transcription Gene Regulation
16.5 Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Gene Regulation
16.6 Eukaryotic Translational and Post-translational Gene Regulation
16.7 Cancer and Gene Regulation


INTRODUCTION Each somatic cell in the body generally contains the same DNA. A few
exceptions include red blood cells, which contain no DNA in their mature state, and some immune
system cells that rearrange their DNA while producing antibodies. In general, however, the genes
that determine whether you have green eyes, brown hair, and how fast you metabolize food are
the same in the cells in your eyes and your liver, even though these organs function quite
differently. If each cell has the same DNA, how is it that cells or organs are different? Why do cells
in the eye differ so dramatically from cells in the liver?

Whereas each cell shares the same genome and DNA sequence, each cell does not turn on, or
express, the same set of genes. Each cell type needs a different set of proteins to perform its
function. Therefore, only a small subset of proteins is expressed in a cell. For the proteins to be
expressed, the DNA must be transcribed into RNA and the RNA must be translated into protein. In
a given cell type, not all genes encoded in the DNA are transcribed into RNA or translated into
protein because specific cells in our body have specific functions. Specialized proteins that make
up the eye (iris, lens, and cornea) are only expressed in the eye, whereas the specialized proteins
in the heart (pacemaker cells, heart muscle, and valves) are only expressed in the heart. At any
given time, only a subset of all of the genes encoded by our DNA are expressed and translated into
proteins. The expression of specific genes is a highly regulated process with many levels and
stages of control. This complexity ensures the proper expression in the proper cell at the proper
time.
420   16 • Gene Expression




      16.1 Regulation of Gene Expression
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Discuss why every cell does not express all of its genes all of the time
         • Describe how prokaryotic gene regulation occurs at the transcriptional level
         • Discuss how eukaryotic gene regulation occurs at the epigenetic, transcriptional, post-
            transcriptional, translational, and post-translational levels

      For a cell to function properly, necessary proteins must be synthesized at the proper time and
      place. All cells control or regulate the synthesis of proteins from information encoded in their DNA.
      The process of turning on a gene to produce RNA and protein is called gene expression. Whether
      in a simple unicellular organism or a complex multi-cellular organism, each cell controls when and
      how its genes are expressed. For this to occur, there must be internal chemical mechanisms that
      control when a gene is expressed to make RNA and protein, how much of the protein is made, and
      when it is time to stop making that protein because it is no longer needed.

      The regulation of gene expression conserves energy and space. It would require a significant
      amount of energy for an organism to express every gene at all times, so it is more energy efficient
      to turn on the genes only when they are required. In addition, only expressing a subset of genes in
      each cell saves space because DNA must be unwound from its tightly coiled structure to
      transcribe and translate the DNA. Cells would have to be enormous if every protein were
      expressed in every cell all the time.

      The control of gene expression is extremely complex. Malfunctions in this process are detrimental
      to the cell and can lead to the development of many diseases, including cancer.

      Prokaryotic versus Eukaryotic Gene Expression
      To understand how gene expression is regulated, we must first understand how a gene codes for a
      functional protein in a cell. The process occurs in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, just in
      slightly different manners.

      Prokaryotic organisms are single-celled organisms that lack a cell nucleus, and their DNA
      therefore floats freely in the cell cytoplasm. To synthesize a protein, the processes of transcription
      and translation occur almost simultaneously. When the resulting protein is no longer needed,
      transcription stops. As a result, the primary method to control what type of protein and how much
      of each protein is expressed in a prokaryotic cell is the regulation of DNA transcription. All of the
      subsequent steps occur automatically. When more protein is required, more transcription occurs.
      Therefore, in prokaryotic cells, the control of gene expression is mostly at the transcriptional level.

      Eukaryotic cells, in contrast, have intracellular organelles that add to their complexity. In
      eukaryotic cells, the DNA is contained inside the cell’s nucleus and there it is transcribed into RNA.
      The newly synthesized RNA is then transported out of the nucleus into the cytoplasm, where
      ribosomes translate the RNA into protein. The processes of transcription and translation are
      physically separated by the nuclear membrane; transcription occurs only within the nucleus, and
      translation occurs only outside the nucleus in the cytoplasm. The regulation of gene expression
      can occur at all stages of the process (Figure 16.3). Regulation may occur when the DNA is
      uncoiled and loosened from nucleosomes to bind transcription factors (epigenetic level), when
      the RNA is transcribed (transcriptional level), when the RNA is processed and exported to the
      cytoplasm after it is transcribed (post-transcriptional level), when the RNA is translated into
      protein (translational level), or after the protein has been made (post-translational level).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      16.1 • Regulation of Gene Expression       421




FIGURE 16.2 Locations of gene regulation. The regulation of gene expression occurs at multiple steps going from DNA to the functional
gene product, usually a protein. It begins with chromatin structure making the DNA more or less accessible for transcription by RNA
polymerase. In eukaryotes, the primary mRNA transcript must be processed before it can be translated in the cytoplasm. The final level of
active protein in the cell depends not only on the rate of synthesis, but also on the rate of degradation of mRNA and protein. Credit: Rao, A.
and Ryan, K. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.




FIGURE 16.3 Regulation in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. A. Prokaryotic transcription and translation occur simultaneously in the cytoplasm,
and regulation occurs primarily at the transcriptional level. B. Eukaryotic gene expression is regulated during transcription and RNA
processing, which take place in the nucleus, and during protein translation, which takes place in the cytoplasm. Further regulation may
occur through post-translational modifications of proteins in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Credit: Rao, A., Ryan, K. Fletcher, S. and Tag,
A. Department of Biology, Texas A&M University.

The differences in the regulation of gene expression between prokaryotes and eukaryotes are summarized in Table
16.1. The regulation of gene expression is discussed in detail in subsequent modules.

                Differences in the Regulation of Gene Expression of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Organisms

        Prokaryotic organisms                                                   Eukaryotic organisms

 Lack a membrane-bound nucleus                  Contain nucleus

 DNA is found in the cytoplasm                  DNA is confined to the nuclear compartment
TABLE 16.1
422   16 • Gene Expression




             Prokaryotic organisms                                       Eukaryotic organisms

       RNA transcription and protein
                                              RNA transcription occurs prior to protein formation, and it takes place in
       formation occur almost
                                              the nucleus. Translation of RNA to protein occurs in the cytoplasm.
       simultaneously

       Gene expression is regulated           Gene expression is regulated at many levels (epigenetic, transcriptional,
       primarily at the transcriptional       nuclear shuttling, post-transcriptional, translational, and post-
       level                                  translational)

      TABLE 16.1



              EVOLUTION CONNECTION

      Evolution of Gene Regulation
      Prokaryotic cells can only regulate gene expression by controlling the amount of transcription. As eukaryotic cells
      evolved, the complexity of the control of gene expression increased. For example, with the evolution of eukaryotic
      cells came compartmentalization of important cellular components and cellular processes. A nuclear region that
      contains the DNA was formed. Transcription and translation were physically separated into two different cellular
      compartments. It therefore became possible to control gene expression by regulating transcription in the nucleus,
      and also by controlling the RNA levels and protein translation present outside the nucleus.

      Most gene regulation is done to conserve cell resources. However, other regulatory processes may be defensive.
      Cellular processes such as gene silencing developed to protect the cell from viral or parasitic infections. If the cell
      could quickly shut off gene expression for a short period of time, it would be able to survive an infection when other
      organisms could not. Therefore, the organism evolved a new process that helped it survive, and it was able to pass
      this new development to offspring.


      16.2 Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe the steps involved in prokaryotic gene regulation
         • Explain the roles of activators, inducers, and repressors in gene regulation

      The DNA of prokaryotes is organized into a circular chromosome, supercoiled within the nucleoid region of the cell
      cytoplasm. Proteins that are needed for a specific function, or that are involved in the same biochemical pathway,
      are encoded together in blocks called operons. For example, all of the genes needed to use lactose as an energy
      source are coded next to each other in the lactose (or lac) operon, and transcribed into a single mRNA.

      In prokaryotic cells, there are three types of regulatory molecules that can affect the expression of operons:
      repressors, activators, and inducers. Repressors and activators are proteins produced in the cell. Both repressors
      and activators regulate gene expression by binding to specific DNA sites adjacent to the genes they control. In
      general, activators bind to the promoter site, while repressors bind to operator regions. Repressors prevent
      transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus, whereas activators increase the transcription of a gene
      in response to an external stimulus. Inducers are small molecules that> may be produced by the cell or that are in
      the cell’s environment. Inducers either activate or repress transcription depending on the needs of the cell and the
      availability of substrate.

      The trp Operon: A Repressible Operon
      Bacteria such as Escherichia coli need amino acids to survive, and are able to synthesize many of them. Tryptophan
      is one such amino acid that E. coli can either ingest from the environment or synthesize using enzymes that are
      encoded by five genes. These five genes are next to each other in what is called the tryptophan (trp) operon (Figure
      16.4). The genes are transcribed into a single mRNA, which is then translated to produce all five enzymes. If



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     16.2 • Prokaryotic Gene Regulation       423



tryptophan is present in the environment, then E. coli does not need to synthesize it and the trp operon is switched
off. However, when tryptophan availability is low, the switch controlling the operon is turned on, the mRNA is
transcribed, the enzyme proteins are translated, and tryptophan is synthesized.




FIGURE 16.4 The tryptophan operon. The five genes that are needed to synthesize tryptophan in E. coli are located next to each other in
the trp operon. When tryptophan is plentiful, two tryptophan molecules bind the repressor protein at the operator sequence. This physically
blocks the RNA polymerase from transcribing the tryptophan genes. When tryptophan is absent, the repressor protein does not bind to the
operator and the genes are transcribed.

The trp operon includes three important regions: the coding region, the trp operator and the trp promoter. The
coding region includes the genes for the five tryptophan biosynthesis enzymes. Just before the coding region is the
transcriptional start site. The promoter sequence, to which RNA polymerase binds to initiate transcription, is
before or “upstream” of the transcriptional start site. Between the promoter and the transcriptional start site is the
operator region.

The trp operator contains the DNA code to which the trp repressor protein can bind. However, the repressor alone
cannot bind to the operator. When tryptophan is present in the cell, two tryptophan molecules bind to the trp
repressor, which changes the shape of the repressor protein to a form that can bind to the trp operator. Binding of
the tryptophan–repressor complex at the operator physically prevents the RNA polymerase from binding to the
promoter and transcribing the downstream genes.

When tryptophan is not present in the cell, the repressor by itself does not bind to the operator, the polymerase can
transcribe the enzyme genes, and tryptophan is synthesized. Because the repressor protein actively binds to the
operator to keep the genes turned off, the trp operon is said to be negatively regulated and the proteins that bind to
the operator to silence trp expression are negative regulators.

     LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this video to learn more about the trp operon.

Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/16-2-prokaryotic-gene-regulation)


Catabolite Activator Protein (CAP): A Transcriptional Activator
Just as the trp operon is negatively regulated by tryptophan molecules, there are proteins that bind to the promoter
sequences that act as positive regulators to turn genes on and activate them. For example, when glucose is scarce,
E. coli bacteria can turn to other sugar sources for fuel. To do this, new genes to process these alternate sugars must
be transcribed. When glucose levels drop, cyclic AMP (cAMP) begins to accumulate in the cell. The cAMP molecule is
a signaling molecule that is involved in glucose and energy metabolism in E. coli. Accumulating cAMP binds to the
positive regulator catabolite activator protein (CAP), a protein that binds to the promoters of operons which
424   16 • Gene Expression



      control the processing of alternative sugars. When cAMP binds to CAP, the complex then binds to the promoter
      region of the genes that are needed to use the alternate sugar sources (Figure 16.5). In these operons, a CAP-
      binding site is located upstream of the RNA-polymerase-binding site in the promoter. CAP binding stabilizes the
      binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter region and increases transcription of the associated protein-coding
      genes.




      FIGURE 16.5 Transcriptional activation by the CAP protein. When glucose levels fall, E. coli may use other sugars for fuel but must
      transcribe new genes to do so. As glucose supplies become limited, cAMP levels increase. This cAMP binds to the CAP protein, a positive
      regulator that binds to a promoter region upstream of the genes required to use other sugar sources.

      The lac Operon: An Inducible Operon
      The third type of gene regulation in prokaryotic cells occurs through inducible operons, which have proteins that
      bind to activate or repress transcription depending on the local environment and the needs of the cell. The lac
      operon is a typical inducible operon. As mentioned previously, E. coli is able to use other sugars as energy sources
      when glucose concentrations are low. One such sugar source is lactose. The lac operon encodes the genes
      necessary to acquire and process the lactose from the local environment. The Z gene of the lac operon encodes
      beta-galactosidase, which breaks lactose down to glucose and galactose.

      However, for the lac operon to be activated, two conditions must be met. First, the level of glucose must be very low
      or non-existent. Second, lactose must be present. Only when glucose is absent and lactose is present will the lac
      operon be transcribed (Figure 16.6). In the absence of glucose, the binding of the CAP protein makes transcription
      of the lac operon more effective. When lactose is present, its metabolite, allolactose, binds to the lac repressor and
      changes its shape so that it cannot bind to the lac operator to prevent transcription. This combination of conditions
      makes sense for the cell, because it would be energetically wasteful to synthesize the enzymes to process lactose if
      glucose was plentiful or lactose was not available. It should be mentioned that the lac operon is transcribed at a
      very low rate even when glucose is present and lactose absent.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      16.2 • Prokaryotic Gene Regulation   425




        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 16.6 Regulation of the lac operon. Transcription of the lac operon is carefully regulated so that its expression only occurs when
glucose is limited and lactose is present to serve as an alternative fuel source.

In E. coli, the trp operon is on by default, while the lac operon is off. Why do you think this is the case?


If glucose is present, then CAP fails to bind to the promoter sequence to activate transcription. If lactose is absent,
then the repressor binds to the operator to prevent transcription. If either of these conditions is met, then
transcription remains off. Only when glucose is absent and lactose is present is the lac operon transcribed at a
higher rate. If both glucose and lactose are present, the transcription rate is low as the CAP is not bound to promote
maximal rates of lac operon transcription (Table 16.2).

                                Signals that Induce or Repress Transcription of the lac Operon

                           Glucose       CAP binds        Lactose       Repressor binds         Transcription

                               +               -              -                  +                     No

                               +               -              +                  -                   Some
                         TABLE 16.2
426   16 • Gene Expression




                                Glucose       CAP binds        Lactose      Repressor binds         Transcription

                                     -              +              -                 +                     No

                                     -              +              +                  -                   Yes

                              TABLE 16.2


           LINK TO LEARNING
      Watch an animated tutorial about the workings of lac operon here.

      Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/16-2-prokaryotic-gene-regulation)


      16.3 Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Explain how chromatin remodeling controls transcriptional access
         • Describe how access to DNA is controlled by histone modification
         • Describe how DNA methylation is related to epigenetic gene changes

      Eukaryotic gene expression is more complex than prokaryotic gene expression because the processes of
      transcription and translation are physically separated. Unlike prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells can regulate gene
      expression at many different levels. Epigenetic changes are inheritable changes in gene expression that do not
      result from changes in the DNA sequence. Eukaryotic gene expression begins with control of access to the DNA.
      Transcriptional access to the DNA can be controlled in two general ways: chromatin remodeling and DNA
      methylation. Chromatin remodeling changes the way that DNA is associated with chromosomal histones. DNA
      methylation is associated with developmental changes and gene silencing.

      Epigenetic Control: Regulating Access to Genes within the Chromosome
      The human genome encodes over 20,000 genes, with hundreds to thousands of genes on each of the 23 human
      chromosomes. The DNA in the nucleus is precisely wound, folded, and compacted into chromosomes so that it will
      fit into the nucleus. It is also organized so that specific segments can be accessed as needed by a specific cell type.

      The first level of organization, or packing, is the winding of DNA strands around histone proteins. Histones package
      and order DNA into structural units called nucleosome complexes, which can control the access of proteins to the
      DNA regions (Figure 16.7a). Under the electron microscope, this winding of DNA around histone proteins to form
      nucleosomes looks like small beads on a string (Figure 16.7b).




      FIGURE 16.7 DNA is folded around histone proteins to create (a) nucleosome complexes. These nucleosomes control the access of
      proteins to the underlying DNA. When viewed through an electron microscope (b), the nucleosomes look like beads on a string. (credit
      “micrograph”: modification of work by Chris Woodcock)




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        16.3 • Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation   427



These beads (histone proteins) can move along the string (DNA) to expose different sections of the molecule. If DNA
encoding a specific gene is to be transcribed into RNA, the nucleosomes surrounding that region of DNA can slide
down the DNA to open that specific chromosomal region and allow for the transcriptional machinery (RNA
polymerase) to initiate transcription (Figure 16.8).



        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 16.8 Nucleosomes can slide along DNA. When nucleosomes are spaced closely together (top), transcription factors cannot bind
and gene expression is turned off. When the nucleosomes are spaced far apart (bottom), the DNA is exposed. Transcription factors can
bind, allowing gene expression to occur. Modifications to the histones and DNA affect nucleosome spacing.

In females, one of the two X chromosomes is inactivated during embryonic development because of epigenetic
changes to the chromatin. What impact do you think these changes would have on nucleosome packing?


How closely the histone proteins associate with the DNA is regulated by signals found on both the histone proteins
and on the DNA. These signals are functional groups added to histone proteins or to DNA and determine whether a
chromosomal region should be open or closed (Figure 16.9 depicts modifications to histone proteins and DNA).
These tags are not permanent, but may be added or removed as needed. Some chemical groups (phosphate,
methyl, or acetyl groups) are attached to specific amino acids in histone "tails" at the N-terminus of the protein.
These groups do not alter the DNA base sequence, but they do alter how tightly wound the DNA is around the
histone proteins. DNA is a negatively charged molecule and unmodified histones are positively charged; therefore,
changes in the charge of the histone will change how tightly wound the DNA molecule will be. By adding chemical
modifications like acetyl groups, the charge becomes less positive, and the binding of DNA to the histones is
relaxed. Altering the location of nucleosomes and the tightness of histone binding opens some regions of chromatin
to transcription and closes others.

The DNA molecule itself can also be modified by methylation. DNA methylation occurs within very specific regions
called CpG islands. These are stretches with a high frequency of cytosine and guanine dinucleotide DNA pairs (CG)
found in the promoter regions of genes. The cytosine member of the CG pair can be methylated (a methyl group is
added). Methylated genes are usually silenced, although methylation may have other regulatory effects. In some
cases, genes that are silenced during the development of the gametes of one parent are transmitted in their
silenced condition to the offspring. Such genes are said to be imprinted. Parental diet or other environmental
conditions may also affect the methylation patterns of genes, which in turn modifies gene expression. Changes in
428   16 • Gene Expression



      chromatin organization interact with DNA methylation. DNA methyltransferases appear to be attracted to chromatin
      regions with specific histone modifications. Highly methylated (hypermethylated) DNA regions with deacetylated
      histones are tightly coiled and transcriptionally inactive.




      FIGURE 16.9 Histone proteins and DNA nucleotides can be modified chemically. Modifications affect nucleosome spacing and gene
      expression. (credit: modification of work by NIH)

      Epigenetic changes are not permanent, although they often persist through multiple rounds of cell division and may
      even cross generational lines. Chromatin remodeling alters the chromosomal structure (open or closed) as needed.
      If a gene is to be transcribed, the histone proteins and DNA in the chromosomal region encoding that gene are
      modified in a way that opens the promoter region to allow RNA polymerase and other proteins, called transcription
      factors, to bind and initiate transcription. If a gene is to remain turned off, or silenced, the histone proteins and DNA
      have different modifications that signal a closed chromosomal configuration. In this closed configuration, the RNA
      polymerase and transcription factors do not have access to the DNA and transcription cannot occur (Figure 16.9).

           LINK TO LEARNING
      View this video that describes how epigenetic regulation controls gene expression.

      Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/16-3-eukaryotic-epigenetic-gene-
      regulation)


      16.4 Eukaryotic Transcription Gene Regulation
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Discuss the role of transcription factors in gene regulation
         • Explain how enhancers and repressors regulate gene expression

      Like prokaryotic cells, the transcription of genes in eukaryotes requires the action of an RNA polymerase to bind to a
      DNA sequence upstream of a gene in order to initiate transcription. However, unlike prokaryotic cells, the eukaryotic
      RNA polymerase requires other proteins, or transcription factors, to facilitate transcription initiation. RNA
      polymerase by itself cannot initiate transcription in eukaryotic cells. There are two types of transcription factors that
      regulate eukaryotic transcription: General (or basal) transcription factors bind to the core promoter region to assist
      with the binding of RNA polymerase. Specific transcription factors bind to various regions outside of the core
      promoter region and interact with the proteins at the core promoter to enhance or repress the activity of the



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           16.4 • Eukaryotic Transcription Gene Regulation   429



polymerase.

    LINK TO LEARNING
View the process of transcription—the making of RNA from a DNA template.

Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/16-4-eukaryotic-transcription-gene-
regulation)


The Promoter and the Transcription Machinery
Genes are organized to make the control of gene expression easier. The promoter region is immediately upstream of
the coding sequence. This region can be short (only a few nucleotides in length) or quite long (hundreds of
nucleotides long). The longer the promoter, the more available space for proteins to bind. This also adds more
control to the transcription process. The length of the promoter is gene-specific and can differ dramatically between
genes. Consequently, the level of control of gene expression can also differ quite dramatically between genes. The
purpose of the promoter is to bind transcription factors that control the initiation of transcription.

Within the core promoter region, 25 to 35 bases upstream of the transcriptional start site, resides the TATA box. The
TATA box has the consensus sequence of 5’-TATAAA-3’. The TATA box is the binding site for a protein complex called
TFIID, which contains a TATA-binding protein. Binding of TFIID recruits other transcription factors, including TFIIB,
TFIIE, TFIIF, and TFIIH. Some of these transcription factors help to bind the RNA polymerase to the promoter, and
others help to activate the transcription initiation complex.

In addition to the TATA box, other binding sites are found in some promoters. Some biologists prefer to restrict the
range of the eukaryotic promoter to the core promoter, or polymerase binding site, and refer to these additional sites
as promoter-proximal elements, because they are usually found within a few hundred base pairs upstream of the
transcriptional start site. Examples of these elements are the CAAT box, with the consensus sequence 5’-CCAAT-3’
and the GC box, with the consensus sequence 5’-GGGCGG-3’. Specific transcription factors can bind to these
promoter-proximal elements to regulate gene transcription. A given gene may have its own combination of these
specific transcription-factor binding sites. There are hundreds of transcription factors in a cell, each of which binds
specifically to a particular DNA sequence motif. When transcription factors bind to the promoter just upstream of
the encoded gene, it is referred to as a cis-acting element, because it is on the same chromosome just next to the
gene. Transcription factors respond to environmental stimuli that cause the proteins to find their binding sites and
initiate transcription of the gene that is needed.

Enhancers and Transcription
In some eukaryotic genes, there are additional regions that help increase or enhance transcription. These regions,
called enhancers, are not necessarily close to the genes they enhance. They can be located upstream of a gene,
within the coding region of the gene, downstream of a gene, or may be thousands of nucleotides away.

Enhancer regions are binding sequences, or sites, for specific transcription factors. When a protein transcription
factor binds to its enhancer sequence, the shape of the protein changes, allowing it to interact with proteins at the
promoter site. However, since the enhancer region may be distant from the promoter, the DNA must bend to allow
the proteins at the two sites to come into contact. DNA bending proteins help to bend the DNA and bring the
enhancer and promoter regions together (Figure 16.10). This shape change allows for the interaction of the specific
activator proteins bound to the enhancers with the general transcription factors bound to the promoter region and
the RNA polymerase.
430   16 • Gene Expression




      FIGURE 16.10 Interaction between proteins at the promoter and enhancer sites. An enhancer is a DNA sequence that promotes
      transcription. Each enhancer is made up of short DNA sequences called distal control elements. Activators bound to the distal control
      elements interact with mediator proteins and transcription factors. Two different genes may have the same promoter but different distal
      control elements, enabling differential gene expression.

      Turning Genes Off: Transcriptional Repressors
      Like prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells also have mechanisms to prevent transcription. Transcriptional repressors
      can bind to promoter or enhancer regions and block transcription. Like the transcriptional activators, repressors
      respond to external stimuli to prevent the binding of activating transcription factors.

      16.5 Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Gene Regulation
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Understand RNA splicing and explain its role in regulating gene expression
         • Describe the importance of RNA stability in gene regulation

      RNA is transcribed, but must be processed into a mature form before translation can begin. This processing that
      takes place after an RNA molecule has been transcribed, but before it is translated into a protein, is called post-
      transcriptional modification. As with the epigenetic and transcriptional stages of processing, this post-
      transcriptional step can also be regulated to control gene expression in the cell. If the RNA is not processed,
      shuttled, or translated, then no protein will be synthesized.

      RNA Splicing, the First Stage of Post-transcriptional Control
      In eukaryotic cells, the RNA transcript often contains regions, called introns, that are removed prior to translation.
      The regions of RNA that code for protein are called exons. (Figure 16.11). After an RNA molecule has been
      transcribed, but prior to its departure from the nucleus to be translated, the RNA is processed and the introns are
      removed by splicing. Splicing is done by spliceosomes, ribonucleoprotein complexes that can recognize the two
      ends of the intron, cut the transcript at those two points, and bring the exons together for ligation.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               16.5 • Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Gene Regulation   431




FIGURE 16.11 Pre-mRNA can be alternatively spliced to create differently mature mRNAs which will ultimately lead to formation of
different proteins from the same gene.



        EVOLUTION CONNECTION

Alternative RNA Splicing
In the 1970s, genes were first observed that exhibited alternative RNA splicing. Alternative RNA splicing is a
mechanism that allows different protein products to be produced from one gene when different combinations of
exons are combined to form the mRNA (Figure 16.12). This alternative splicing can be haphazard, but more often it
is controlled and acts as a mechanism of gene regulation, with the frequency of different splicing alternatives
controlled by the cell as a way to control the production of different protein products in different cells or at different
stages of development. Alternative splicing is now understood to be a common mechanism of gene regulation in
eukaryotes; according to one estimate, 70 percent of genes in humans are expressed as multiple proteins through
alternative splicing. Although there are multiple ways to alternatively splice RNA transcripts, the original 5'-3' order
of the exons is always conserved. That is, a transcript with exons 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 might be spliced 1 2 4 5 6 7 or 1 2 3 6
7, but never 1 2 5 4 3 6 7.




                                    FIGURE 16.12 There are five basic modes of alternative splicing.

How could alternative splicing evolve? Introns have a beginning- and ending-recognition sequence; it is easy to
imagine the failure of the splicing mechanism to identify the end of an intron and instead find the end of the next
intron, thus removing two introns and the intervening exon. In fact, there are mechanisms in place to prevent such
intron skipping, but mutations are likely to lead to their failure. Such “mistakes” would more than likely produce a
nonfunctional protein. Indeed, the cause of many genetic diseases is abnormal splicing rather than mutations in a
432   16 • Gene Expression



      coding sequence. However, alternative splicing could possibly create a protein variant without the loss of the original
      protein, opening up possibilities for adaptation of the new variant to new functions. Gene duplication has played an
      important role in the evolution of new functions in a similar way by providing genes that may evolve without
      eliminating the original, functional protein.

      Question: In the corn snake Pantherophis guttatus, there are several different color variants, including amelanistic
      snakes whose skin patterns display only red and yellow pigments. The cause of amelanism in these snakes was
      recently identified as the insertion of a transposable element into an intron in the OCA2 (oculocutaneous albinism)
      gene. How might the insertion of extra genetic material into an intron lead to a nonfunctional protein?


           LINK TO LEARNING
      Visualize how mRNA splicing happens by watching the process in action in this video.

      Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/16-5-eukaryotic-post-transcriptional-
      gene-regulation)


      Control of RNA Stability
      Before the mRNA leaves the nucleus, it is given two protective "caps" that prevent the ends of the strand from
      degrading during its journey. 5' and 3' exonucleases can degrade unprotected RNAs. The 5' cap, which is placed on
      the 5' end of the mRNA, is usually composed of a methylated guanosine triphosphate molecule (GTP). The GTP is
      placed "backward" on the 5' end of the mRNA, so that the 5' carbons of the GTP and the terminal nucleotide are
      linked through three phosphates. The poly-A tail, which is attached to the 3' end, is usually composed of a long
      chain of adenine nucleotides. These changes protect the two ends of the RNA from exonuclease attack.

      Once the RNA is transported to the cytoplasm, the length of time that the RNA resides there can be controlled. Each
      RNA molecule has a defined lifespan and decays at a specific rate. This rate of decay can influence how much
      protein is in the cell. If the decay rate is increased, the RNA will not exist in the cytoplasm as long, shortening the
      time available for translation of the mRNA to occur. Conversely, if the rate of decay is decreased, the mRNA
      molecule will reside in the cytoplasm longer and more protein can be translated. This rate of decay is referred to as
      the RNA stability. If the RNA is stable, it will be detected for longer periods of time in the cytoplasm.

      Binding of proteins to the RNA can also influence its stability. Proteins called RNA-binding proteins, or RBPs, can
      bind to the regions of the mRNA just upstream or downstream of the protein-coding region. These regions in the
      RNA that are not translated into protein are called the untranslated regions, or UTRs. They are not introns (those
      have been removed in the nucleus). Rather, these are regions that regulate mRNA localization, stability, and protein
      translation. The region just before the protein-coding region is called the 5' UTR, whereas the region after the coding
      region is called the 3' UTR (Figure 16.13). The binding of RBPs to these regions can increase or decrease the
      stability of an RNA molecule, depending on the specific RBP that binds.




      FIGURE 16.13 RNA-binding proteins. The protein-coding region of this processed mRNA is flanked by 5' and 3' untranslated regions
      (UTRs). The presence of RNA-binding proteins at the 5' or 3' UTR influences the stability of the RNA molecule.

      RNA Stability and microRNAs
      In addition to RBPs that bind to and control (increase or decrease) RNA stability, other elements called microRNAs
      can bind to the RNA molecule. These microRNAs, or miRNAs, are short RNA molecules that are only 21 to 24
      nucleotides in length. The miRNAs are made in the nucleus as longer pre-miRNAs. These pre-miRNAs are chopped
      into mature miRNAs by a protein called Dicer. Like transcription factors and RBPs, mature miRNAs recognize a
      specific sequence and bind to the RNA; however, miRNAs also associate with a ribonucleoprotein complex called
      the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). The RNA component of the RISC base-pairs with complementary



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            16.6 • Eukaryotic Translational and Post-translational Gene Regulation   433



sequences on an mRNA and either impede translation of the message or lead to the degradation of the mRNA.

16.6 Eukaryotic Translational and Post-translational Gene Regulation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Understand the process of translation and discuss its key factors
   • Describe how the initiation complex controls translation
   • Explain the different ways in which the post-translational control of gene expression takes place

After RNA has been transported to the cytoplasm, it is translated into protein. Control of this process is largely
dependent on the RNA molecule. As previously discussed, the stability of the RNA will have a large impact on its
translation into a protein. As the stability changes, the amount of time that it is available for translation also
changes.

The Initiation Complex and Translation Rate
Like transcription, translation is controlled by proteins that bind and initiate the process. In translation, the complex
that assembles to start the process is referred to as the translation initiation complex. In eukaryotes, translation is
initiated by binding the initiating met-tRNAi to the 40S ribosome. This tRNA is brought to the 40S ribosome by a
protein initiation factor, eukaryotic initiation factor-2 (eIF-2). The eIF-2 protein binds to the high-energy molecule
guanosine triphosphate (GTP). The tRNA-eIF2-GTP complex then binds to the 40S ribosome. A second complex
forms on the mRNA. Several different initiation factors recognize the 5' cap of the mRNA and proteins bound to the
poly-A tail of the same mRNA, forming the mRNA into a loop. The cap-binding protein eIF4F brings the mRNA
complex together with the 40S ribosome complex. The ribosome then scans along the mRNA until it finds a start
codon AUG. When the anticodon of the initiator tRNA and the start codon are aligned, the GTP is hydrolyzed, the
initiation factors are released, and the large 60S ribosomal subunit binds to form the translation complex. The
binding of eIF-2 to the RNA is controlled by phosphorylation. If eIF-2 is phosphorylated, it undergoes a
conformational change and cannot bind to GTP. Therefore, the initiation complex cannot form properly and
translation is impeded (Figure 16.14). When eIF-2 remains unphosphorylated, the initiation complex can form
normally and translation can proceed.



       VISUAL CONNECTION




               FIGURE 16.14 Gene expression can be controlled by factors that bind the translation initiation complex.

An increase in phosphorylation levels of eIF-2 has been observed in patients with neurodegenerative diseases such
as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and Huntington’s. What impact do you think this might have on protein synthesis?


Chemical Modifications, Protein Activity, and Longevity
Proteins can be chemically modified with the addition of groups including methyl, phosphate, acetyl, and ubiquitin
groups. The addition or removal of these groups from proteins regulates their activity or the length of time they exist
434   16 • Gene Expression



      in the cell. Sometimes these modifications can regulate where a protein is found in the cell—for example, in the
      nucleus, in the cytoplasm, or attached to the plasma membrane.

      Chemical modifications occur in response to external stimuli such as stress, the lack of nutrients, heat, or ultraviolet
      light exposure. These changes can alter epigenetic accessibility, transcription, mRNA stability, or translation—all
      resulting in changes in expression of various genes. This is an efficient way for the cell to rapidly change the levels of
      specific proteins in response to the environment. Because proteins are involved in every stage of gene regulation,
      the phosphorylation of a protein (depending on the protein that is modified) can alter accessibility to the
      chromosome, can alter translation (by altering transcription factor binding or function), can change nuclear shuttling
      (by influencing modifications to the nuclear pore complex), can alter RNA stability (by binding or not binding to the
      RNA to regulate its stability), can modify translation (increase or decrease), or can change post-translational
      modifications (add or remove phosphates or other chemical modifications).

      The addition of a ubiquitin group to a protein marks that protein for degradation. Ubiquitin acts like a flag indicating
      that the protein lifespan is complete. These proteins are moved to the proteasome, an organelle that functions to
      remove proteins, to be degraded (Figure 16.15). One way to control gene expression, therefore, is to alter the
      longevity of the protein.




                             FIGURE 16.15 Proteins with ubiquitin tags are marked for degradation within the proteasome.

      16.7 Cancer and Gene Regulation
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe how changes to gene expression can cause cancer
         • Explain how changes to gene expression at different levels can disrupt the cell cycle
         • Discuss how understanding regulation of gene expression can lead to better drug design

      Cancer is not a single disease but includes many different diseases. In cancer cells, mutations modify cell-cycle
      control and cells don’t stop growing as they normally would. Mutations can also alter the growth rate or the
      progression of the cell through the cell cycle. One example of a gene modification that alters the growth rate is
      increased phosphorylation of cyclin B, a protein that controls the progression of a cell through the cell cycle and
      serves as a cell-cycle checkpoint protein.

      For cells to move through each phase of the cell cycle, the cell must pass through checkpoints. This ensures that the
      cell has properly completed the step and has not encountered any mutation that will alter its function. Many
      proteins, including cyclin B, control these checkpoints. The phosphorylation of cyclin B, a post-translational event,
      alters its function. As a result, cells can progress through the cell cycle unimpeded, even if mutations exist in the cell
      and its growth should be terminated. This post-translational change of cyclin B prevents it from controlling the cell
      cycle and contributes to the development of cancer.

      Cancer: Disease of Altered Gene Expression
      Cancer can be described as a disease of altered gene expression. There are many proteins that are turned on or off
      (gene activation or gene silencing) that dramatically alter the overall activity of the cell. A gene that is not normally
      expressed in that cell can be switched on and expressed at high levels. This can be the result of gene mutation or
      changes in gene regulation (epigenetic, transcription, post-transcription, translation, or post-translation).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          16.7 • Cancer and Gene Regulation   435



Changes in epigenetic regulation, transcription, RNA stability, protein translation, and post-translational control can
be detected in cancer. While these changes don’t occur simultaneously in one cancer, changes at each of these
levels can be detected when observing cancer at different sites in different individuals. Therefore, changes in
histone acetylation (epigenetic modification that leads to gene expression), activation of transcription factors by
phosphorylation, increased RNA stability, increased translational control, and protein modification can all be
detected at some point in various cancer cells. Scientists are working to understand the common changes that give
rise to certain types of cancer or how a modification might be exploited to destroy a tumor cell.

Tumor Suppressor Genes, Oncogenes, and Cancer
In normal cells, some genes function to prevent excess, inappropriate cell growth. These are tumor-suppressor
genes, which are active in normal cells to prevent uncontrolled cell growth. There are many tumor-suppressor genes
in cells. The most studied tumor-suppressor gene is p53, which is mutated in over 50 percent of all cancer types.
The p53 protein itself functions as a transcription factor. It can bind to sites in the promoters of genes to initiate
transcription. Therefore, the mutation of p53 in cancer will dramatically alter the transcriptional activity of its target
genes.

    LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this animation (https://openstax.org/l/p53_cancer) to learn more about the use of p53 in fighting cancer.


Proto-oncogenes are positive cell-cycle regulators. When mutated, proto-oncogenes can become oncogenes and
cause cancer. Overexpression of the oncogene can lead to uncontrolled cell growth. This is because oncogenes can
alter transcriptional activity, stability, or protein translation of another gene that directly or indirectly controls cell
growth. An example of an oncogene involved in cancer is a protein called myc. Myc is a transcription factor that is
aberrantly activated in Burkett’s Lymphoma, a cancer of the lymph system. Overexpression of myc transforms
normal B cells into cancerous cells that continue to grow uncontrollably. High B-cell numbers can result in tumors
that can interfere with normal bodily function. Patients with Burkett’s lymphoma can develop tumors on their jaw or
in their mouth that interfere with the ability to eat.

Cancer and Epigenetic Alterations
Silencing genes through epigenetic mechanisms is also very common in cancer cells. There are characteristic
modifications to histone proteins and DNA that are associated with silenced genes. In cancer cells, the DNA in the
promoter region of silenced genes is methylated on cytosine DNA residues in CpG islands. Histone proteins that
surround that region lack the acetylation modification that is present when the genes are expressed in normal cells.
This combination of DNA methylation and histone deacetylation (epigenetic modifications that lead to gene
silencing) is commonly found in cancer. When these modifications occur, the gene present in that chromosomal
region is silenced. Increasingly, scientists understand how epigenetic changes are altered in cancer. Because these
changes are temporary and can be reversed—for example, by preventing the action of the histone deacetylase
protein that removes acetyl groups, or by DNA methyl transferase enzymes that add methyl groups to cytosines in
DNA—it is possible to design new drugs and new therapies to take advantage of the reversible nature of these
processes. Indeed, many researchers are testing how a silenced gene can be switched back on in a cancer cell to
help re-establish normal growth patterns.

Genes involved in the development of many other illnesses, ranging from allergies to inflammation to autism, are
thought to be regulated by epigenetic mechanisms. As our knowledge of how genes are controlled deepens, new
ways to treat diseases like cancer will emerge.

Cancer and Transcriptional Control
Alterations in cells that give rise to cancer can affect the transcriptional control of gene expression. Mutations that
activate transcription factors, such as increased phosphorylation, can increase the binding of a transcription factor
to its binding site in a promoter. This could lead to increased transcriptional activation of that gene that results in
modified cell growth. Alternatively, a mutation in the DNA of a promoter or enhancer region can increase the binding
ability of a transcription factor. This could also lead to the increased transcription and aberrant gene expression that
is seen in cancer cells.
436   16 • Gene Expression



      Researchers have been investigating how to control the transcriptional activation of gene expression in cancer.
      Identifying how a transcription factor binds, or a pathway that activates where a gene can be turned off, has led to
      new drugs and new ways to treat cancer. In breast cancer, for example, many proteins are overexpressed. This can
      lead to increased phosphorylation of key transcription factors that increase transcription. One such example is the
      overexpression of the epidermal growth-factor receptor (EGFR) in a subset of breast cancers. The EGFR pathway
      activates many protein kinases that, in turn, activate many transcription factors which control genes involved in cell
      growth. New drugs that prevent the activation of EGFR have been developed and are used to treat these cancers.

      Cancer and Post-transcriptional Control
      Changes in the post-transcriptional control of a gene can also result in cancer. Recently, several groups of
      researchers have shown that specific cancers have altered expression of miRNAs. Because miRNAs bind to the 3'
      UTR of RNA molecules to degrade them, overexpression of these miRNAs could be detrimental to normal cellular
      activity. Too many miRNAs could dramatically decrease the RNA population, leading to a decrease in protein
      expression. Several studies have demonstrated a change in the miRNA population in specific cancer types. It
      appears that the subset of miRNAs expressed in breast cancer cells is quite different from the subset expressed in
      lung cancer cells or even from normal breast cells. This suggests that alterations in miRNA activity can contribute to
      the growth of breast cancer cells. These types of studies also suggest that if some miRNAs are specifically
      expressed only in cancer cells, they could be potential drug targets. It would, therefore, be conceivable that new
      drugs that turn off miRNA expression in cancer could be an effective method to treat cancer.

      Cancer and Translational/Post-translational Control
      There are many examples of how translational or post-translational modifications of proteins arise in cancer.
      Modifications are found in cancer cells from the increased translation of a protein to changes in protein
      phosphorylation to alternative splice variants of a protein. An example of how the expression of an alternative form
      of a protein can have dramatically different outcomes is seen in colon cancer cells. The c-Flip protein, a protein
      involved in mediating the cell-death pathway, comes in two forms: long (c-FLIPL) and short (c-FLIPS). Both forms
      appear to be involved in initiating controlled cell-death mechanisms in normal cells. However, in colon cancer cells,
      expression of the long form results in increased cell growth instead of cell death. Clearly, the expression of the
      wrong protein dramatically alters cell function and contributes to the development of cancer.

      New Drugs to Combat Cancer: Targeted Therapies
      Scientists are using what is known about the regulation of gene expression in disease states, including cancer, to
      develop new ways to treat and prevent disease development. Many scientists are designing drugs on the basis of the
      gene expression patterns within individual tumors. This idea, that therapy and medicines can be tailored to an
      individual, has given rise to the field of personalized medicine. With an increased understanding of gene regulation
      and gene function, medicines can be designed to specifically target diseased cells without harming healthy cells.
      Some new medicines, called targeted therapies, have exploited the overexpression of a specific protein or the
      mutation of a gene to develop a new medication to treat disease. One such example is the use of anti-EGF receptor
      medications to treat the subset of breast cancer tumors that have very high levels of the EGF protein. Undoubtedly,
      more targeted therapies will be developed as scientists learn more about how gene expression changes can cause
      cancer.



              CAREER CONNECTION

      Clinical Trial Coordinator
      A clinical trial coordinator is the person managing the proceedings of the clinical trial. This job includes coordinating
      patient schedules and appointments, maintaining detailed notes, building the database to track patients (especially
      for long-term follow-up studies), ensuring proper documentation has been acquired and accepted, and working with
      the nurses and doctors to facilitate the trial and publication of the results. A clinical trial coordinator may have a
      science background, like a nursing degree, or other certification. People who have worked in science labs or in
      clinical offices are also qualified to become a clinical trial coordinator. These jobs are generally in hospitals;
      however, some clinics and doctor’s offices also conduct clinical trials and may hire a coordinator.



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             16 • Key Terms   437




Key Terms
3' UTR 3' untranslated region; region just                   it into protein
   downstream of the protein-coding region in an RNA      microRNA (miRNA) small RNA molecules
   molecule that is not translated                           (approximately 21 nucleotides in length) that bind
5' cap a methylated guanosine triphosphate (GTP)             to RNA molecules to degrade them
   molecule that is attached to the 5' end of a           myc oncogene that causes cancer in many cancer
   messenger RNA to protect the end from degradation         cells
5' UTR 5' untranslated region; region just upstream of    negative regulator protein that prevents
   the protein-coding region in an RNA molecule that is      transcription
   not translated                                         operator region of DNA outside of the promoter
activator protein that binds to prokaryotic operators        region that binds activators or repressors that
   to increase transcription                                 control gene expression in prokaryotic cells
catabolite activator protein (CAP) protein that           operon collection of genes involved in a pathway that
   complexes with cAMP to bind to the promoter               are transcribed together as a single mRNA in
   sequences of operons which control sugar                  prokaryotic cells
   processing when glucose is not available               poly-A tail a series of adenine nucleotides that are
cis-acting element transcription factor binding sites        attached to the 3' end of an mRNA to protect the
   within the promoter that regulate the transcription       end from degradation
   of a gene adjacent to it                               positive regulator protein that increases
Dicer enzyme that chops the pre-miRNA into the               transcription
   mature form of the miRNA                               post-transcriptional control of gene expression after
DNA methylation epigenetic modification that leads           the RNA molecule has been created but before it is
   to gene silencing; a process involving adding a           translated into protein
   methyl group to the DNA molecule                       post-translational control of gene expression after a
enhancer segment of DNA that is upstream,                    protein has been created
   downstream, perhaps thousands of nucleotides           proteasome organelle that degrades proteins
   away, or on another chromosome that influence the      repressor protein that binds to the operator of
   transcription of a specific gene                          prokaryotic genes to prevent transcription
epigenetic heritable changes that do not involve          RISC protein complex that binds along with the
   changes in the DNA sequence                               miRNA to the RNA to degrade it
eukaryotic initiation factor-2 (eIF-2) protein that       RNA stability how long an RNA molecule will remain
   binds first to an mRNA to initiate translation            intact in the cytoplasm
gene expression processes that control the turning        RNA-binding protein (RBP) protein that binds to the
   on or turning off of a gene                               3' or 5' UTR to increase or decrease the RNA
guanine diphosphate (GDP) molecule that is left              stability
   after the energy is used to start translation          small 40S ribosomal subunit ribosomal subunit that
guanosine triphosphate (GTP) energy-providing                binds to the RNA to translate it into protein
   molecule that binds to eIF-2 and is needed for         trans-acting element transcription factor binding site
   translation                                               found outside the promoter or on another
histone acetylation epigenetic modification that             chromosome that influences the transcription of a
   leads to gene expression; a process involving adding      particular gene
   or removing an acetyl functional group                 transcription factor protein that binds to the DNA at
inducer a small molecule that either activates or            the promoter or enhancer region and that influences
   represses transcription                                   transcription of a gene
inducible operon operon that can be activated or          transcription factor binding site sequence of DNA to
   repressed depending on cellular needs and the             which a transcription factor binds
   surrounding environment                                transcriptional start site site at which transcription
initiation complex protein complex containing eIF-2          begins
   that starts translation                                trp operon series of genes necessary to synthesize
lac operon operon in prokaryotic cells that encodes          tryptophan in prokaryotic cells
   genes required for processing and intake of lactose    tryptophan amino acid that can be synthesized by
large 60S ribosomal subunit second, larger                   prokaryotic cells when necessary
   ribosomal subunit that binds to the RNA to translate   untranslated region segment of the RNA molecule
438   16 • Chapter Summary



   that is not translated into protein. These regions lie      the protein-coding region
   before (upstream or 5') and after (downstream or 3')

Chapter Summary
16.1 Regulation of Gene Expression                          16.3 Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation
While all somatic cells within an organism contain the      In eukaryotic cells, the first stage of gene-expression
same DNA, not all cells within that organism express        control occurs at the epigenetic level. Epigenetic
the same proteins. Prokaryotic organisms express            mechanisms control access to the chromosomal region
most of their genes most of the time. However, some         to allow genes to be turned on or off. Chromatin
genes are expressed only when they are needed.              remodeling controls how DNA is packed into the
Eukaryotic organisms, on the other hand, express only       nucleus by regulating how tightly the DNA is wound
a subset of their genes in any given cell. To express a     around histone proteins. The DNA itself may be
protein, the DNA is first transcribed into RNA, which is    methylated to selectively silence genes. The addition
then translated into proteins, which are then targeted      or removal of chemical modifications (or flags) to
to specific cellular locations. In prokaryotic cells,       histone proteins or DNA signals the cell to open or
transcription and translation occur almost                  close a chromosomal region. Therefore, eukaryotic
simultaneously. In eukaryotic cells, transcription          cells can control whether a gene is expressed by
occurs in the nucleus and is separate from the              controlling accessibility to the binding of RNA
translation that occurs in the cytoplasm. Gene              polymerase and its transcription factors.
expression in prokaryotes is mostly regulated at the
transcriptional level (some epigenetic and post-
                                                            16.4 Eukaryotic Transcription Gene
translational regulation is also present), whereas in       Regulation
eukaryotic cells, gene expression is regulated at the       To start transcription, general transcription factors,
epigenetic, transcriptional, post-transcriptional,          such as TFIID, TFIIB, and others, must first bind to the
translational, and post-translational levels.               TATA box and recruit RNA polymerase to that location.
                                                            Additional transcription factors may also bind to other
16.2 Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
                                                            regulatory elements at the promoter to increase or
The regulation of gene expression in prokaryotic cells      prevent transcription. In addition to promoter
occurs at the transcriptional level. There are two          sequences, enhancer regions help augment
majors kinds of proteins that control prokaryotic           transcription. Enhancers can be upstream,
transcription: repressors and activators. Repressors        downstream, within a gene itself, or on other
bind to an operator region to block the action of RNA       chromosomes. Specific transcription factors bound to
polymerase. Activators bind to the promoter to              enhancer regions may either increase or prevent
enhance the binding of RNA polymerase. Inducer              transcription.
molecules can increase transcription either by
inactivating repressors or by activating activator          16.5 Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Gene
proteins. In the trp operon, the trp repressor is itself    Regulation
activated by binding to tryptophan. Therefore, if           Post-transcriptional control can occur at any stage
tryptophan is not needed, the repressor is bound to the     after transcription, including RNA splicing and RNA
operator and transcription remains off. The lac operon      stability. Once RNA is transcribed, it must be processed
is activated by the CAP (catabolite activator protein),     to create a mature RNA that is ready to be translated.
which binds to the promoter to stabilize RNA                This involves the removal of introns that do not code
polymerase binding. CAP is itself activated by cAMP,        for protein. Spliceosomes bind to the signals that mark
whose concentration rises as the concentration of           the exon/intron border to remove the introns and ligate
glucose falls. However, the lac operon also requires the    the exons together. Once this occurs, the RNA is
presence of lactose for transcription to occur. Lactose     mature and can be translated. Alternative splicing can
inactivates the lac repressor, and prevents the             produce more than one mRNA from a given transcript.
repressor protein from binding to the lac operator. With    Different splicing variants may be produced under
the repressor inactivated, transcription may proceed.       different conditions.
Therefore glucose must be absent and lactose must be
present for effective transcription of the lac operon.      RNA is created and spliced in the nucleus, but needs to
                                                            be transported to the cytoplasm to be translated. RNA
                                                            is transported to the cytoplasm through the nuclear



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 16 • Visual Connection Questions     439



pore complex. Once the RNA is in the cytoplasm, the          on the RNA. Modifications (such as phosphorylation) of
length of time it resides there before being degraded,       proteins in this complex can prevent proper translation
called RNA stability, can also be altered to control the     from occurring. Once a protein has been synthesized, it
overall amount of protein that is synthesized. The RNA       can be modified (phosphorylated, acetylated,
stability can be increased, leading to longer residency      methylated, or ubiquitinated). These post-translational
time in the cytoplasm, or decreased, leading to              modifications can greatly impact the stability,
shortened time and less protein synthesis. RNA               degradation, or function of the protein.
stability is controlled by RNA-binding proteins (RPBs)
and microRNAs (miRNAs). These RPBs and miRNAs
                                                             16.7 Cancer and Gene Regulation
bind to the 5' UTR or the 3' UTR of the RNA to increase      Cancer can be described as a disease of altered gene
or decrease RNA stability. MicroRNAs associated with         expression. Changes at every level of eukaryotic gene
RISC complexes may repress translation or lead to            expression can be detected in some form of cancer at
mRNA breakdown.                                              some point in time. In order to understand how
                                                             changes to gene expression can cause cancer, it is
16.6 Eukaryotic Translational and Post-
                                                             critical to understand how each stage of gene
translational Gene Regulation                                regulation works in normal cells. By understanding the
Changing the status of the RNA or the protein itself can     mechanisms of control in normal, non-diseased cells, it
affect the amount of protein, the function of the            will be easier for scientists to understand what goes
protein, or how long it is found in the cell. To translate   wrong in disease states including complex ones like
the protein, a protein initiator complex must assemble       cancer.

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 16.6 In E. coli, the trp operon is on by              changes would have on nucleosome packing?
      default, while the lac operon is off. Why do you
                                                                3. Figure 16.14 An increase in phosphorylation
      think that this is the case?
                                                                   levels of eIF-2 has been observed in patients
   2. Figure 16.8 In females, one of the two X                     with neurodegenerative diseases such as
      chromosomes is inactivated during embryonic                  Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and Huntington’s.
      development because of epigenetic changes to                 What impact do you think this might have on
      the chromatin. What impact do you think these                protein synthesis?

Review Questions
   4. Control of gene expression in eukaryotic cells               organisms?
      occurs at which level(s)?                                      a. Cells can become specialized within a
        a. only the transcriptional level                                multicellular organism.
        b. epigenetic and transcriptional levels                     b. Organisms can conserve energy and
        c. epigenetic, transcriptional, and                              resources.
           translational levels                                      c. Cells grow larger to accommodate protein
        d. epigenetic, transcriptional, post-                            production.
           transcriptional, translational, and post-                 d. Both A and B.
           translational levels
                                                                7. If glucose is absent, but so is lactose, the lac
   5. Post-translational control refers to:                        operon will be ________.
        a. regulation of gene expression after                        a. activated
            transcription                                             b. repressed
        b. regulation of gene expression after                        c. activated, but only partially
            translation                                               d. mutated
        c. control of epigenetic activation
        d. period between transcription and                     8. Prokaryotic cells lack a nucleus. Therefore, the
            translation                                            genes in prokaryotic cells are:
                                                                     a. all expressed, all of the time
   6. How does the regulation of gene expression                     b. transcribed and translated almost
      support continued evolution of more complex                       simultaneously
440   16 • Review Questions



         c. transcriptionally controlled because               promoter elements encompasses 250bp. Which
            translation begins before transcription            of the scientist’s hypotheses is most likely to be
            ends                                               correct?
         d. b and c are both true                                a. More transcripts will be made from Gene
                                                                     B.
   9. The ara operon is an inducible operon that                 b. Transcription of Gene A involves fewer
      controls the breakdown of the sugar arabinose.                 transcription factors.
      When arabinose is present in a bacterium it                 c. Enhancers control Gene B’s transcription.
      binds to the protein AraC, and the complex binds           d. Transcription of Gene A is more controlled
      to the initiator site to promote transcription. In             than transcription of Gene B.
      this scenario, AraC is a(n) ________.
        a. activator                                       15. Which of the following are involved in post-
        b. inducer                                             transcriptional control?
        c. repressor                                             a. control of RNA splicing
        d. operator                                              b. control of RNA shuttling
                                                                  c. control of RNA stability
  10. What are epigenetic modifications?                         d. all of the above
       a. the addition of reversible changes to
           histone proteins and DNA                        16. Binding of an RNA binding protein will ________
       b. the removal of nucleosomes from the DNA              the stability of the RNA molecule.
       c. the addition of more nucleosomes to the                a. increase
           DNA                                                   b. decrease
       d. mutation of the DNA sequence                           c. neither increase nor decrease
                                                                 d. either increase or decrease
  11. Which of the following are true of epigenetic
      changes?                                             17. An unprocessed pre-mRNA has the following
        a. allow DNA to be transcribed                         structure.
        b. move histones to open or close a
           chromosomal region
        c. are temporary
        d. all of the above
                                                               Which of the following is not a possible size (in
  12. The binding of ________ is required for                  bp) of the mature mRNA?
      transcription to start.                                    a. 205bp
        a. a protein                                             b. 180bp
        b. DNA polymerase                                        c. 150bp
         c. RNA polymerase                                       d. 100bp
        d. a transcription factor
                                                           18. Alternative splicing has been estimated to occur
  13. What will result from the binding of a                   in more than 95% of multi-exon genes. Which of
      transcription factor to an enhancer region?              the following is not an evolutionary advantage of
        a. decreased transcription of an adjacent              alternative splicing?
            gene                                                  a. Alternative splicing increases diversity
        b. increased transcription of a distant gene                 without increasing genome size.
         c. alteration of the translation of an adjacent          b. Different gene isoforms can be expressed
            gene                                                     in different tissues.
        d. initiation of the recruitment of RNA                   c. Alternative splicing creates shorter mRNA
            polymerase                                               transcripts.
                                                                 d. Different gene isoforms can be expressed
  14. A scientist compares the promoter regions of                   during different stages of development.
      two genes. Gene A’s core promoter plus
      proximal promoter elements encompasses               19. Post-translational modifications of proteins can
      70bp. Gene B’s core promoter plus proximal               affect which of the following?



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            16 • Critical Thinking Questions   441



       a.   protein function                                   a.   transformation genes
       b.   transcriptional regulation                         b.   tumor suppressor genes
       c.   chromatin modification                             c.   oncogenes
       d.   all of the above                                   d.   mutated genes

 20. A scientist mutates eIF-2 to eliminate its GTP      22. Targeted therapies are used in patients with a
     hydrolysis capability. How would this mutated           set gene expression pattern. A targeted therapy
     form of eIF-2 alter translation?                        that prevents the activation of the estrogen
       a. Initiation factors would not be able to bind       receptor in breast cancer would be beneficial to
           to mRNA.                                          which type of patient?
       b. The large ribosomal subunit would not be             a. patients who express the EGFR receptor in
           able to interact with mRNA transcripts.                 normal cells
       c. tRNAi-Met would not scan mRNA                        b. patients with a mutation that inactivates
           transcripts for the start codon.                        the estrogen receptor
       d. eIF-2 would not be able to interact with             c. patients with lots of the estrogen receptor
           the small ribosomal subunit.                            expressed in their tumor
                                                               d. patients that have no estrogen receptor
 21. Cancer causing genes are called ________.                     expressed in their tumor


Critical Thinking Questions
 23. Name two differences between prokaryotic and            expression of histone deacetylase 9 (HDAC9, an
     eukaryotic cells and how these differences              enzyme that removes acetyl groups from
     benefit multicellular organisms.                        histones). Why would the decreased expression
                                                             of HDAC9 cause immune cells to produce
 24. Describe how controlling gene expression will
                                                             inflammatory genes at inappropriate times?
     alter the overall protein levels in the cell.
                                                         30. A mutation within the promoter region can alter
 25. Describe how transcription in prokaryotic cells
                                                             transcription of a gene. Describe how this can
     can be altered by external stimulation such as
                                                             happen.
     excess lactose in the environment.
                                                         31. What could happen if a cell had too much of an
 26. What is the difference between a repressible
                                                             activating transcription factor present?
     and an inducible operon?
                                                         32. A scientist identifies a potential transcription
 27. In cancer cells, alteration to epigenetic
                                                             regulation site 300bp downstream of a gene and
     modifications turns off genes that are normally
                                                             hypothesizes that it is a repressor. What
     expressed. Hypothetically, how could you
                                                             experiment (with results) could he perform to
     reverse this process to turn these genes back
                                                             support this hypothesis?
     on?
                                                         33. Describe how RBPs can prevent miRNAs from
 28. A scientific study demonstrated that rat
                                                             degrading an RNA molecule.
     mothering behavior impacts the stress response
     in their pups. Rats that were born and grew up      34. How can external stimuli alter post-
     with attentive mothers showed low activation of         transcriptional control of gene expression?
     stress-response genes later in life, while rats
                                                         35. Protein modification can alter gene expression in
     with inattentive mothers had high activation of
                                                             many ways. Describe how phosphorylation of
     stress-response genes in the same situation. An
                                                             proteins can alter gene expression.
     additional study that swapped the pups at birth
     (i.e., rats born to inattentive mothers grew up     36. Alternative forms of a protein can be beneficial
     with attentive mothers and vice versa) showed           or harmful to a cell. What do you think would
     the same positive effect of attentive mothering.        happen if too much of an alternative protein
     How do genetics and/or epigenetics explain the          bound to the 3' UTR of an RNA and caused it to
     results of this study?                                  degrade?

 29. Some autoimmune diseases show a positive            37. Changes in epigenetic modifications alter the
     correlation with dramatically decreased                 accessibility and transcription of DNA. Describe
442   16 • Critical Thinking Questions



       how environmental stimuli, such as ultraviolet          DNA methylation and prevent the removal of
       light exposure, could modify gene expression.           acetyl groups from histone proteins. Explain how
                                                               these drugs could affect gene expression to help
  38. A scientist discovers a virus encoding a Protein X
                                                               kill tumor cells.
      that degrades a subunit of the eIF4F complex.
      Knowing that this virus transcribes its own          40. How can understanding the gene expression
      mRNAs in the cytoplasm of human cells, why               pattern in a cancer cell tell you something about
      would Protein X be an effective virulence factor?        that specific form of cancer?

  39. New drugs are being developed that decrease




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 17
Biotechnology and Genomics




FIGURE 17.1 Genomics compares the DNA of different organisms, enabling scientists to create maps with which to
navigate different organisms' DNA. (credit "map": modification of photo by NASA)


CHAPTER OUTLINE
17.1 Biotechnology
17.2 Mapping Genomes
17.3 Whole-Genome Sequencing
17.4 Applying Genomics
17.5 Genomics and Proteomics


INTRODUCTION The study of nucleic acids began with the discovery of DNA, progressed to the
study of genes and small fragments, and has now exploded to the field of genomics. Genomics is
the study of entire genomes, including the complete set of genes, their nucleotide sequence and
organization, and their interactions within a species and with other species. DNA sequencing
technology has contributed to advances in genomics. Just as information technology has led to
Google maps that enable people to obtain detailed information about locations around the globe,
researchers use genomic information to create similar DNA maps of different organisms. These
findings have helped anthropologists to better understand human migration and have aided the
medical field through mapping human genetic diseases. Genomic information can contribute to
scientific understanding in various ways and knowledge in the field is quickly growing.

17.1 Biotechnology
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Describe gel electrophoresis
   • Explain molecular and reproductive cloning
   • Describe biotechnology uses in medicine and agriculture

Biotechnology is the use of biological agents for technological advancement. Biotechnology was
used for breeding livestock and crops long before people understood the scientific basis of these
techniques. Since the discovery of the structure of DNA in 1953, the biotechnology field has grown
rapidly through both academic research and private companies. The primary applications of this
444   17 • Biotechnology and Genomics



      technology are in medicine (vaccine and antibiotic production) and agriculture (crop genetic
      modification in order to increase yields). Biotechnology also has many industrial applications,
      such as fermentation, treating oil spills, and producing biofuels (Figure 17.2).




      FIGURE 17.2 Fungi, bacteria, and other organisms that have antimicrobial properties produce antibiotics. The first
      antibiotic discovered was penicillin. Pharmaceutical companies now commercially produce and test antibiotics for
      their potential to inhibit bacterial growth. (credit "advertisement": modification of work by NIH; credit "test plate":
      modification of work by Don Stalons/CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

      Basic Techniques to Manipulate Genetic Material (DNA and RNA)
      To understand the basic techniques used to work with nucleic acids, remember that nucleic acids
      are macromolecules made of nucleotides (a sugar, a phosphate, and a nitrogenous base) linked by
      phosphodiester bonds. The phosphate groups on these molecules each have a net negative
      charge. An entire set of DNA molecules in the nucleus is called the genome. DNA has two
      complementary strands linked by hydrogen bonds between the paired bases. Exposure to high
      temperatures (DNA denaturation) can separate the two strands and cooling can reanneal them.
      The DNA polymerase enzyme can replicate the DNA. Unlike DNA, which is located in the
      eukaryotic cells' nucleus, RNA molecules leave the nucleus. The most common type of RNA that
      researchers analyze is the messenger RNA (mRNA) because it represents the protein-coding
      genes that are actively expressed. However, RNA molecules present some other challenges to
      analysis, as they are often less stable than DNA.

      DNA and RNA Extraction
      To study or manipulate nucleic acids, one must first isolate or extract the DNA or RNA from the
      cells. Researchers use various techniques to extract different types of DNA (Figure 17.3). Most
      nucleic acid extraction techniques involve steps to break open the cell and use enzymatic
      reactions to destroy all macromolecules that are not desired (such as unwanted molecule
      degradation and separation from the DNA sample). A lysis buffer (a solution which is mostly a
      detergent) breaks cells. Note that lysis means "to split". These enzymes break apart lipid
      molecules in the cell membranes and nuclear membranes. Enzymes such as proteases and
      ribonucleases (RNases) break down proteins and RNA, respectively. Using alcohol precipitates
      the DNA. Human genomic DNA is usually visible as a gelatinous, white mass. One can store the
      DNA samples frozen at –80°C for several years.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    17.1 • Biotechnology   445




                             FIGURE 17.3 This diagram shows the basic method of DNA extraction.

Scientists perform RNA analysis to study gene expression patterns in cells. RNA is naturally very unstable because
RNAses are commonly present in nature and very difficult to inactivate. Similar to DNA, RNA extraction involves
using various buffers and enzymes to inactivate macromolecules and preserve the RNA.

Gel Electrophoresis
Because nucleic acids are negatively charged ions at neutral or basic pH in an aqueous environment, an electric field
can mobilize them. Gel electrophoresis is a technique that scientists use to separate molecules on the basis of size,
using this charge. One can separate the nucleic acids as whole chromosomes or fragments. The nucleic acids load
into a slot near the semisolid, porous gel matrix's negative electrode, and pulled toward the positive electrode at the
gel's opposite end. Smaller molecules move through the gel's pores faster than larger molecules. This difference in
the migration rate separates the fragments on the basis of size. There are molecular weight standard samples that
researchers can run alongside the molecules to provide a size comparison. We can observe nucleic acids in a gel
matrix using various fluorescent or colored dyes. Distinct nucleic acid fragments appear as bands at specific
distances from the gel's top (the negative electrode end) on the basis of their size (Figure 17.4). A mixture of
genomic DNA fragments of varying sizes appear as a long smear; whereas, uncut genomic DNA is usually too large to
run through the gel and forms a single large band at the gel's top.
446   17 • Biotechnology and Genomics




      FIGURE 17.4 a) Shown are DNA fragments from seven samples run on a gel, stained with a fluorescent dye, and viewed under UV light; and
      b) a researcher from International Rice Research Institute, reviewing DNA profiles using UV light. (credit: a: James Jacob, Tompkins
      Cortland Community College b: International Rice Research Institute)

      Nucleic Acid Fragment Amplification by Polymerase Chain Reaction
      Although genomic DNA is visible to the naked eye when it is extracted in bulk, DNA analysis often requires focusing
      on one or more specific genome regions. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique that scientists use to
      amplify specific DNA regions for further analysis (Figure 17.5). Researchers use PCR for many purposes in
      laboratories, such as cloning gene fragments to analyze genetic diseases, identifying contaminant foreign DNA in a
      sample, and amplifying DNA for sequencing. More practical applications include determining paternity and detecting
      genetic diseases.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                17.1 • Biotechnology    447




FIGURE 17.5 Scientists use polymerase chain reaction, or PCR, to amplify a specific DNA sequence. Primers—short pieces of DNA
complementary to each end of the target sequence combine with genomic DNA, Taq polymerase, and deoxynucleotides. Taq polymerase is
a DNA polymerase isolated from the thermostable bacterium Thermus aquaticus that is able to withstand the high temperatures that
scientists use in PCR. Thermus aquaticus grows in the Lower Geyser Basin of Yellowstone National Park. Reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-
PCR) is similar to PCR, but cDNA is made from an RNA template before PCR begins.

DNA fragments can also be amplified from an RNA template in a process called reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-
PCR). The first step is to recreate the original DNA template strand (called cDNA) by applying DNA nucleotides to
the mRNA. This process is called reverse transcription. This requires the presence of an enzyme called reverse
transcriptase. After the cDNA is made, regular PCR can be used to amplify it.

     LINK TO LEARNING
Deepen your understanding of the polymerase chain reaction by watching this video (https://openstax.org/l/PCR).


Hybridization, Southern Blotting, and Northern Blotting
Scientists can probe nucleic acid samples, such as fragmented genomic DNA and RNA extracts, for the presence of
certain sequences. Scientists design and label short DNA fragments, or probes with radioactive or fluorescent dyes
to aid detection. Gel electrophoresis separates the nucleic acid fragments according to their size. Scientists then
transfer the fragments in the gel onto a nylon membrane in a procedure we call blotting (Figure 17.6). Scientists can
then probe the nucleic acid fragments that are bound to the membrane's surface with specific radioactively or
fluorescently labeled probe sequences. When scientists transfer DNA to a nylon membrane, they refer to the
technique as Southern blotting. When they transfer the RNA to a nylon membrane, they call it Northern blotting.
Scientists use Southern blots to detect the presence of certain DNA sequences in a given genome, and Northern
blots to detect gene expression.
448   17 • Biotechnology and Genomics




      FIGURE 17.6 Scientists use Southern blotting to find a particular sequence in a DNA sample. Scientists separate DNA fragments on a gel,
      transfer them to a nylon membrane, and incubate them with a DNA probe complementary to the sequence of interest. Northern blotting is
      similar to Southern blotting, but scientists run RNA on the gel instead of DNA. In Western blotting, scientists run proteins on a gel and
      detect them using antibodies.

      Molecular Cloning
      In general, the word “cloning” means the creation of a perfect replica; however, in biology, the re-creation of a
      whole organism is referred to as “reproductive cloning.” Long before attempts were made to clone an entire
      organism, researchers learned how to reproduce desired regions or fragments of the genome, a process that is
      referred to as molecular cloning. The technique offered methods to create new medicines and to overcome
      difficulties with existing ones. When Lydia Villa-Komaroff, working in the Gilbert Lab at Harvard, published the first
      paper outlining the technique for producing synthetic insulin, diabetes researchers and patients received new hope
      in fighting the disease. Insulin at that time was only produced using pig and cow pancreases, and the life-saving
      substance was often in short supply. Synthetic insulin, once mass produced, would solve that problem for many
      patients. These early discoveries led to the "BioTech Boom," and spurred continued research and funding for newer
      and better ways to improve health.

      Cloning small genome fragments allows researchers to manipulate and study specific genes (and their protein
      products), or noncoding regions in isolation. A plasmid, or vector, is a small circular DNA molecule that replicates
      independently of the chromosomal DNA. In cloning, scientists can use the plasmid molecules to provide a "folder"
      in which to insert a desired DNA fragment. Plasmids are usually introduced into a bacterial host for proliferation. In
      the bacterial context, scientists call the DNA fragment from the human genome (or the genome of another studied
      organism) foreign DNA, or a transgene, to differentiate it from the bacterium's DNA, or the host DNA.

      Plasmids occur naturally in bacterial populations (such as Escherichia coli) and have genes that can contribute
      favorable traits to the organism, such as antibiotic resistance (the ability to be unaffected by antibiotics). Scientists
      have repurposed and engineered plasmids as vectors for molecular cloning and the large-scale production of
      important reagents, such as insulin and human growth hormone. An important feature of plasmid vectors is the ease
      with which scientists can introduce a foreign DNA fragment via the multiple cloning site (MCS). The MCS is a short
      DNA sequence containing multiple sites that different commonly available restriction endonucleases can cut.
      Restriction endonucleases recognize specific DNA sequences and cut them in a predictable manner. They are
      naturally produced by bacteria as a defense mechanism against foreign DNA. Many restriction endonucleases make
      staggered cuts in the two DNA strands, such that the cut ends have a 2- or 4-base single-stranded overhang.
      Because these overhangs are capable of annealing with complementary overhangs, we call them “sticky ends.”
      Adding the enzyme DNA ligase permanently joins the DNA fragments via phosphodiester bonds. In this way,
      scientists can splice any DNA fragment generated by restriction endonuclease cleavage between the plasmid DNA's
      two ends that has been cut with the same restriction endonuclease (Figure 17.7).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       17.1 • Biotechnology   449



Recombinant DNA Molecules
Plasmids with foreign DNA inserted into them are called recombinant DNA molecules because they are created
artificially and do not occur in nature. They are also called chimeric molecules because the origin of different
molecule parts of the molecules can be traced back to different species of biological organisms or even to chemical
synthesis. We call proteins that are expressed from recombinant DNA molecules recombinant proteins. Not all
recombinant plasmids are capable of expressing genes. The recombinant DNA may need to move into a different
vector (or host) that is better designed for gene expression. Scientists may also engineer plasmids to express
proteins only when certain environmental factors stimulate them, so they can control the recombinant proteins'
expression.



        VISUAL CONNECTION




                             FIGURE 17.7 This diagram shows the steps involved in molecular cloning.

You are working in a molecular biology lab and, unbeknownst to you, your lab partner left the foreign genomic DNA
that you are planning to clone on the lab bench overnight instead of storing it in the freezer. As a result, it was
degraded by nucleases, but still used in the experiment. The plasmid, on the other hand, is fine. What results would
you expect from your molecular cloning experiment?

  a.   There will be no colonies on the bacterial plate.
  b.   There will be blue colonies only.
  c.   There will be blue and white colonies.
  d.   The will be white colonies only.
450   17 • Biotechnology and Genomics




           LINK TO LEARNING
      View an animation of recombination in cloning (https://openstax.org/l/recombination) from the DNA Learning Center.


      Cellular Cloning
      Unicellular organisms, such as bacteria and yeast, naturally produce clones of themselves when they replicate
      asexually by binary fission; this is known as cellular cloning. The nuclear DNA duplicates by the process of mitosis,
      which creates an exact replica of the genetic material.

      Reproductive Cloning
      Reproductive cloning is a method scientists use to clone or identically copy an entire multicellular organism. Most
      multicellular organisms undergo reproduction by sexual means, which involves genetic hybridization of two
      individuals (parents), making it impossible to generate an identical copy or a clone of either parent. Recent advances
      in biotechnology have made it possible to artificially induce mammal asexual reproduction in the laboratory.

      Parthenogenesis, or “virgin birth,” occurs when an embryo grows and develops without egg fertilization. This is a
      form of asexual reproduction. An example of parthenogenesis occurs in species in which the female lays an egg and
      if the egg is fertilized, it is a diploid egg and the individual develops into a female. If the egg is not fertilized, it
      remains a haploid egg and develops into a male. The unfertilized egg is a parthenogenic, or virgin egg. Some insects
      and reptiles lay parthenogenic eggs that can develop into adults.

      Sexual reproduction requires two cells. When the haploid egg and sperm cells fuse, a diploid zygote results. The
      zygote nucleus contains the genetic information to produce a new individual. However, early embryonic
      development requires the cytoplasmic material contained in the egg cell. This idea forms the basis for reproductive
      cloning. Therefore, if we replace the egg cell's haploid nucleus with a diploid nucleus from the cell of any individual
      of the same species (a donor), it will become a zygote that is genetically identical to the donor. Somatic cell nuclear
      transfer is the technique of transferring a diploid nucleus into an enucleated egg. Scientists can use it for either
      therapeutic cloning or reproductive cloning.

      The first cloned animal was Dolly, a sheep born in 1996. The reproductive cloning success rate at the time was very
      low. Dolly lived for seven years and died of respiratory complications (Figure 17.8). There is speculation that
      because the cell DNA belongs to an older individual, DNA's age may affect a cloned individual's life expectancy.
      Since Dolly, scientists have cloned successfully several animals such as horses, bulls, and goats, although these
      animals often exhibit facial, limb, and cardiac abnormalities. There have been attempts at producing cloned human
      embryos as sources of embryonic stem cells for therapeutic purposes. Therapeutic cloning produces stem cells in
      the attempt to remedy detrimental diseases or defects (unlike reproductive cloning, which aims to reproduce an
      organism). While some have met therapeutic cloning efforts with resistance because of bioethical considerations,
      new discoveries have identified additional opportunities for stem cell therapies. For example, Freda Miller and
      Elaine Fuchs, working independently, discovered stem cells in different layers of the skin. These cells help the skin
      repair itself, and their discovery may have applications in treatments of skin disease and potentially other
      conditions, such as nerve damage.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      17.1 • Biotechnology     451




        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 17.8 Dolly the sheep was the first mammal to be cloned. To create Dolly, they removed the nucleus from a donor egg cell. They
then introduced the nucleus from a second sheep into the cell, which divided to the blastocyst stage before they implanted it in a surrogate
mother. (credit: modification of work by "Squidonius"/Wikimedia Commons)

Do you think Dolly was a Finn-Dorset or a Scottish Blackface sheep?


Genetic Engineering
Genetic engineering is the alteration of an organism’s genotype using recombinant DNA technology to modify an
organism’s DNA to achieve desirable traits. The addition of foreign DNA in the form of recombinant DNA vectors
generated by molecular cloning is the most common method of genetic engineering. The organism that receives the
recombinant DNA is a genetically modified organism (GMO). If the foreign DNA comes from a different species, the
host organism is transgenic. Scientists have genetically modified bacteria, plants, and animals since the early
1970s for academic, medical, agricultural, and industrial purposes. In the US, GMOs such as Roundup-ready
soybeans and borer-resistant corn are part of many common processed foods.

Gene Targeting
Although classical methods of studying gene function began with a given phenotype and determined the genetic
basis of that phenotype, modern techniques allow researchers to start at the DNA sequence level and ask: "What
does this gene or DNA element do?" This technique, reverse genetics, has resulted in reversing the classic genetic
methodology. This method would be similar to damaging a body part to determine its function. An insect that loses a
wing cannot fly, which means that the wing's function is flight. The classical genetic method would compare insects
that cannot fly with insects that can fly, and observe that the non-flying insects have lost wings. Similarly, mutating
or deleting genes provides researchers with clues about gene function. We collectively call the methods they use to
disable gene function gene targeting. Gene targeting is the use of recombinant DNA vectors to alter a particular
gene's expression, either by introducing mutations in a gene, or by eliminating a certain gene's expression by
deleting a part or all of the gene sequence from the organism's genome.

Biotechnology in Medicine and Agriculture
It is easy to see how biotechnology can be used for medicinal purposes. Knowledge of the genetic makeup of our
452   17 • Biotechnology and Genomics



      species, the genetic basis of heritable diseases, and the invention of technology to manipulate and fix mutant genes
      provides methods to treat disease. Biotechnology in agriculture can enhance resistance to disease, pest, and
      environmental stress, and improve both crop yield and quality.

      Genetic Diagnosis and Gene Therapy
      Scientists call the process of testing for suspected genetic defects before administering treatment genetic
      diagnosis by genetic testing. Depending on the inheritance patterns of a disease-causing gene, family members are
      advised to undergo genetic testing. For example, doctors usually advise people diagnosed with breast cancer to
      have a biopsy so that the medical team can determine the genetic basis of cancer development. Doctors base
      treatment plans on genetic test findings that determine the type of cancer. If inherited gene mutations cause the
      cancer, doctors also advise other female relatives to undergo genetic testing and periodic screening for breast
      cancer. Doctors also offer genetic testing for fetuses (or embryos with in vitro fertilization) to determine the
      presence or absence of disease-causing genes in families with specific debilitating diseases.

      Gene therapy is a genetic engineering technique used to cure disease. In its simplest form, it involves the
      introduction of a good gene at a random location in the genome to aid the cure of a disease that is caused by a
      mutated gene. The good gene is usually introduced into diseased cells as part of a vector transmitted by a virus that
      can infect the host cell and deliver the foreign DNA (Figure 17.9). More advanced forms of gene therapy try to
      correct the mutation at the original site in the genome, such as is the case with treatment of severe combined
      immunodeficiency (SCID).




      FIGURE 17.9 Gene therapy using an adenovirus vector can be used to cure certain genetic diseases in which a person has a defective gene.
      (credit: NIH)

      Production of Vaccines, Antibiotics, and Hormones
      Traditional vaccination strategies use weakened or inactive forms of microorganisms to mount the initial immune
      response. Modern techniques use the genes of microorganisms cloned into vectors to mass produce the desired
      antigen. Doctors then introduce the antigen into the body to stimulate the primary immune response and trigger
      immune memory. The medical field has used genes cloned from the influenza virus to combat the constantly
      changing strains of this virus.

      Antibiotics are a biotechnological product. Microorganisms, such as fungi, naturally produce them to attain an
      advantage over bacterial populations. Cultivating and manipulating fungal cells produces antibiotics.



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                       17.1 • Biotechnology   453



Scientists used recombinant DNA technology to produce large-scale quantities of human insulin in E. coli as early as
1978. Previously, it was only possible to treat diabetes with pig insulin, which caused allergic reactions in humans
because of differences in the gene product. In addition, doctors use human growth hormone (HGH) to treat growth
disorders in children. Researchers cloned the HGH gene from a cDNA library and inserted it into E. coli cells by
cloning it into a bacterial vector.

Transgenic Animals
Although several recombinant proteins in medicine are successfully produced in bacteria, some proteins require a
eukaryotic animal host for proper processing. For this reason, the desired genes are cloned and expressed in
animals, such as sheep, goats, chickens, and mice. We call animals that have been modified to express recombinant
DNA transgenic animals. Several human proteins are expressed in transgenic sheep and goat milk, and some are
expressed in chicken eggs. Scientists have used mice extensively for expressing and studying recombinant gene and
mutation effects.

Transgenic Plants
Manipulating the DNA of plants (i.e., creating GMOs) has helped to create desirable traits, such as disease
resistance, herbicide and pesticide resistance, better nutritional value, and better shelf-life (Figure 17.10). Plants
are the most important source of food for the human population. Farmers developed ways to select for plant
varieties with desirable traits long before modern-day biotechnology practices were established.




FIGURE 17.10 Corn, a major agricultural crop used to create products for a variety of industries, is often modified through plant
biotechnology. (credit: Keith Weller, USDA)

We call plants that have received recombinant DNA from other species transgenic plants. Because they are not
natural, government agencies closely monitor transgenic plants and other GMOs to ensure that they are fit for
human consumption and do not endanger other plant and animal life. Because foreign genes can spread to other
species in the environment, extensive testing is required to ensure ecological stability. Staples like corn, potatoes,
and tomatoes were the first crop plants that scientists genetically engineered.

Transformation of Plants Using Agrobacterium tumefaciens
Gene transfer occurs naturally between species in microbial populations. Many viruses that cause human diseases,
such as cancer, act by incorporating their DNA into the human genome. In plants, tumors caused by the bacterium
454   17 • Biotechnology and Genomics



      Agrobacterium tumefaciens occur by DNA transfer from the bacterium to the plant. Although the tumors do not kill
      the plants, they stunt the plants and they become more susceptible to harsh environmental conditions. A.
      tumefaciens affects many plants such as walnuts, grapes, nut trees, and beets. Artificially introducing DNA into
      plant cells is more challenging than in animal cells because of the thick plant cell wall.

      Researchers used the natural transfer of DNA from Agrobacterium to a plant host to introduce DNA fragments of
      their choice into plant hosts. In nature, the disease-causing A. tumefaciens have a set of plasmids, Ti plasmids
      (tumor-inducing plasmids), that contain genes to produce tumors in plants. DNA from the Ti plasmid integrates into
      the infected plant cell’s genome. Researchers manipulate the Ti plasmids to remove the tumor-causing genes and
      insert the desired DNA fragment for transfer into the plant genome. The Ti plasmids carry antibiotic resistance
      genes to aid selection and researchers can propagate them in E. coli cells as well.

      The Organic Insecticide Bacillus thuringiensis
      Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is a bacterium that produces protein crystals during sporulation that are toxic to many
      insect species that affect plants. Insects need to ingest Bt toxin in order to activate the toxin. Insects that have
      eaten Bt toxin stop feeding on the plants within a few hours. After the toxin activates in the insects' intestines, they
      die within a couple of days. Modern biotechnology has allowed plants to encode their own crystal Bt toxin that acts
      against insects. Scientists have cloned the crystal toxin genes from Bt and introduced them into plants. Bt toxin is
      safe for the environment, nontoxic to humans and other mammals, and organic farmers have approved it as a
      natural insecticide.

      Flavr Savr Tomato
      The first GM crop on the market was the Flavr Savr Tomato in 1994. Scientists used antisense RNA technology to
      slow the softening and rotting process caused by fungal infections, which led to increased shelf life of the GM
      tomatoes. Additional genetic modification improved the tomato's flavor. The Flavr Savr tomato did not successfully
      stay in the market because of problems maintaining and shipping the crop.

      17.2 Mapping Genomes
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Define genomics
         • Describe genetic and physical maps
         • Describe genomic mapping methods

      Genomics is the study of entire genomes, including the complete set of genes, their nucleotide sequence and
      organization, and their interactions within a species and with other species. Genome mapping is the process of
      finding the locations of genes on each chromosome. The maps that genome mapping create are comparable to the
      maps that we use to navigate streets. A genetic map is an illustration that lists genes and their location on a
      chromosome. Genetic maps provide the big picture (similar to an interstate highway map) and use genetic markers
      (similar to landmarks). A genetic marker is a gene or sequence on a chromosome that co-segregates (shows
      genetic linkage) with a specific trait. Early geneticists called this linkage analysis. Physical maps present the
      intimate details of smaller chromosome regions (similar to a detailed road map). A physical map is a representation
      of the physical distance, in nucleotides, between genes or genetic markers. Both genetic linkage maps and physical
      maps are required to build a genome’s complete picture. Having a complete genome map of the genome makes it
      easier for researchers to study individual genes. Human genome maps help researchers in their efforts to identify
      human disease-causing genes related to illnesses like cancer, heart disease, and cystic fibrosis. We can use genome
      mapping in a variety of other applications, such as using live microbes to clean up pollutants or even prevent
      pollution. Research involving plant genome mapping may lead to producing higher crop yields or developing plants
      that better adapt to climate change.

      Genetic Maps
      The study of genetic maps begins with linkage analysis, a procedure that analyzes the recombination frequency
      between genes to determine if they are linked or show independent assortment. Scientists used the term linkage
      before the discovery of DNA. Early geneticists relied on observing phenotypic changes to understand an organism’s
      genotype. Shortly after Gregor Mendel (the father of modern genetics) proposed that traits were determined by



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             17.2 • Mapping Genomes        455



what we now call genes, other researchers observed that different traits were often inherited together, and thereby
deduced that the genes were physically linked by their location on the same chromosome. Gene mapping relative to
each other based on linkage analysis led to developing the first genetic maps.

Observations that certain traits were always linked and certain others were not linked came from studying the
offspring of crosses between parents with different traits. For example, in garden pea experiments, researchers
discovered, that the flower’s color and plant pollen’s shape were linked traits, and therefore the genes encoding
these traits were in close proximity on the same chromosome. We call exchanging DNA between homologous
chromosome pairs genetic recombination, which occurs by crossing over DNA between homologous DNA strands,
such as nonsister chromatids. Linkage analysis involves studying the recombination frequency between any two
genes. The greater the distance between two genes, the higher the chance that a recombination event will occur
between them, and the higher the recombination frequency between them. Figure 17.11 shows two possibilities for
recombination between two nonsister chromatids during meiosis. If the recombination frequency between two
genes is less than 50 percent, they are linked.




FIGURE 17.11 Crossover may occur at different locations on the chromosome. Recombination between genes A and B is more frequent
than recombination between genes B and C because genes A and B are farther apart. Therefore, a crossover is more likely to occur between
them.

The generation of genetic maps requires markers, just as a road map requires landmarks (such as rivers and
mountains). Scientists based early genetic maps on using known genes as markers. Scientists now use more
sophisticated markers, including those based on non-coding DNA, to compare individuals’ genomes in a population.
Although individuals of a given species are genetically similar, they are not identical. Every individual has a unique
set of traits. These minor differences in the genome between individuals in a population are useful for genetic
mapping purposes. In general, a good genetic marker is a region on the chromosome that shows variability or
polymorphism (multiple forms) in the population.

Some genetic markers that scientists use in generating genetic maps are restriction fragment length
polymorphisms (RFLP), variable number of tandem repeats (VNTRs), microsatellite polymorphisms, and the
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We can detect RFLPs (sometimes pronounced “rif-lips”) when the DNA
of an individual is cut with a restriction endonuclease that recognizes specific sequences in the DNA to generate a
series of DNA fragments, which we can then analyze using gel electrophoresis. Every individual’s DNA will give rise
to a unique pattern of bands when cut with a particular set of restriction endonucleases. Scientists sometimes refer
to this as an individual’s DNA “fingerprint.” Certain chromosome regions that are subject to polymorphism will lead
to generating the unique banding pattern. VNTRs are repeated sets of nucleotides present in DNA’s non-coding
regions. Non-coding, or “junk,” DNA has no known biological function; however, research shows that much of this
DNA is actually transcribed. While its function is uncertain, it is certainly active, and it may be involved in regulating
456   17 • Biotechnology and Genomics



      coding genes. The number of repeats may vary in a population’s individual organisms. Microsatellite polymorphisms
      are similar to VNTRs, but the repeat unit is very small. SNPs are variations in a single nucleotide.

      Because genetic maps rely completely on the natural process of recombination, natural increases or decreases in
      the recombination level of a given genome area affects mapping. Some parts of the genome are recombination
      hotspots; whereas, others do not show a propensity for recombination. For this reason, it is important to look at
      mapping information developed by multiple methods.

      Physical Maps
      A physical map provides detail of the actual physical distance between genetic markers, as well as the number of
      nucleotides. There are three methods scientists use to create a physical map: cytogenetic mapping, radiation hybrid
      mapping, and sequence mapping. Cytogenetic mapping uses information from microscopic analysis of stained
      chromosome sections (Figure 17.12). It is possible to determine the approximate distance between genetic markers
      using cytogenetic mapping, but not the exact distance (number of base pairs). Radiation hybrid mapping uses
      radiation, such as x-rays, to break the DNA into fragments. We can adjust the radiation amount to create smaller or
      larger fragments. This technique overcomes the limitation of genetic mapping, and we can adjust the radiation so
      that increased or decreased recombination frequency does not affect it. Sequence mapping resulted from DNA
      sequencing technology that allowed for creating detailed physical maps with distances measured in terms of the
      number of base pairs. Creating genomic libraries and complementary DNA (cDNA) libraries (collections of cloned
      sequences or all DNA from a genome) has sped the physical mapping process. A genetic site that scientists use to
      generate a physical map with sequencing technology (a sequence-tagged site, or STS) is a unique sequence in the
      genome with a known exact chromosomal location. An expressed sequence tag (EST) and a single sequence length
      polymorphism (SSLP) are common STSs. An EST is a short STS that we can identify with cDNA libraries, while we
      obtain SSLPs from known genetic markers, which provide a link between genetic and physical maps.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            17.2 • Mapping Genomes    457




FIGURE 17.12 A cytogenetic map shows the appearance of a chromosome after scientists stain and exam it under a microscope. (credit:
National Human Genome Research Institute)

Genetic and Physical Maps Integration
Genetic maps provide the outline and physical maps provide the details. It is easy to understand why both genome
mapping technique types are important to show the big picture. Scientists use information from each technique in
combination to study the genome. Scientists are using genomic mapping with different model organisms for
research. Genome mapping is still an ongoing process, and as researchers develop more advanced techniques, they
expect more breakthroughs. Genome mapping is similar to completing a complicated puzzle using every piece of
available data. Mapping information generated in laboratories all over the world goes into central databases, such as
GenBank at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Researchers are making efforts for the
information to be more easily accessible to other researchers and the general public. Just as we use global
positioning systems instead of paper maps to navigate through roadways, NCBI has created a genome viewer tool to
simplify the data-mining process.



        SCIENTIFIC METHOD CONNECTION

How to Use a Genome Map Viewer
Problem statement: Do the human, macaque, and mouse genomes contain common DNA sequences?

Develop a hypothesis.
458   17 • Biotechnology and Genomics



      Go to this website (https://openstax.org/l/GeneINSR) to test the hypothesis.

      The web page displays the comparison of the gene sequences of many organisms to the Human Insulin Receptor
      gene. Explore the type of information provided, select the groups of organisms needed for testing of the hypothesis
      from the top portion of the displayed data. Focus the attention to the bottom part, the Selected Orthologues.
      Explore which columns are relevant to the needed information.

      On the same page, there are other options to explore, not all are necessary for the task, however it might give more
      insight to the value of genome/gene comparisons.


           LINK TO LEARNING
      Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) is a searchable online catalog of human genes and genetic disorders.
      This website shows genome mapping information, and also details the history and research of each trait and
      disorder. Click this link (https://openstax.org/l/OMIM) to search for traits (such as handedness) and genetic
      disorders (such as diabetes).


      17.3 Whole-Genome Sequencing
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe three types of sequencing
         • Define whole-genome sequencing

      Although there have been significant advances in the medical sciences in recent years, doctors are still confounded
      by some diseases, and they are using whole-genome sequencing to discover the root of the problem. Whole-
      genome sequencing is a process that determines an entire genome’s DNA sequence. Whole-genome sequencing is
      a brute-force approach to problem solving when there is a genetic basis at the core of a disease. Several
      laboratories now provide services to sequence, analyze, and interpret entire genomes.

      For example, whole-exome sequencing is a lower-cost alternative to whole genome sequencing. In exome
      sequencing, the doctor sequences only the DNA’s coding, exon-producing regions. In 2010, doctors used whole-
      exome sequencing to save a young boy whose intestines had multiple mysterious abscesses. The child had several
      colon operations with no relief. Finally, they performed whole-exome sequencing, which revealed a defect in a
      pathway that controls apoptosis (programmed cell death). The doctors used a bone-marrow transplant to overcome
      this genetic disorder, leading to a cure for the boy. He was the first person to receive successful treatment based on
      a whole-exome sequencing diagnosis. Today, human genome sequencing is more readily available and results are
      available within two days for about $1000.

      Strategies Used in Sequencing Projects
      The basic sequencing technique used in all modern day sequencing projects is the chain termination method (also
      known as the dideoxy method), which Fred Sanger developed in the 1970s. The chain termination method involves
      DNA replication of a single-stranded template by using a primer and a regular deoxynucleotide (dNTP), which is a
      monomer, or a single DNA unit. The primer and dNTP mix with a small proportion of fluorescently labeled
      dideoxynucleotides (ddNTPs). The ddNTPs are monomers that are missing a hydroxyl group (–OH) at the site at
      which another nucleotide usually attaches to form a chain (Figure 17.13). Scientists label each ddNTP with a
      different color of fluorophore. Every time a ddNTP incorporates in the growing complementary strand, it terminates
      the DNA replication process, which results in multiple short strands of replicated DNA that each terminate at a
      different point during replication. When gel electrophoresis processes the reaction mixture after separating into
      single strands, the multiple newly replicated DNA strands form a ladder because of the differing sizes. Because the
      ddNTPs are fluorescently labeled, each band on the gel reflects the DNA strand’s size and the ddNTP that
      terminated the reaction. The different colors of the fluorophore-labeled ddNTPs help identify the ddNTP
      incorporated at that position. Reading the gel on the basis of each band’s color on the ladder produces the template
      strand’s sequence (Figure 17.14).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       17.3 • Whole-Genome Sequencing         459




FIGURE 17.13 A dideoxynucleotide is similar in structure to a deoxynucleotide, but is missing the 3' hydroxyl group (indicated by the box).
When a dideoxynucleotide is incorporated into a DNA strand, DNA synthesis stops.




FIGURE 17.14 This figure illustrates Frederick Sanger's dideoxy chain termination method. Using dideoxynucleotides, the DNA fragment
can terminate at different points. The DNA separates on the basis of size, and we can read these bands based on the fragments’ size.

Early Strategies: Shotgun Sequencing and Pair-Wise End Sequencing
In shotgun sequencing method, several DNA fragment copies cut randomly into many smaller pieces (somewhat
like what happens to a round shot cartridge when fired from a shotgun). All of the segments sequence using the
chain-sequencing method. Then, with sequence computer assistance, scientists can analyze the fragments to see
where their sequences overlap. By matching overlapping sequences at each fragment’s end, scientists can reform
the entire DNA sequence. A larger sequence that is assembled from overlapping shorter sequences is called a
contig. As an analogy, consider that someone has four copies of a landscape photograph that you have never seen
before and know nothing about how it should appear. The person then rips up each photograph with their hands, so
that different size pieces are present from each copy. The person then mixes all of the pieces together and asks you
to reconstruct the photograph. In one of the smaller pieces you see a mountain. In a larger piece, you see that the
same mountain is behind a lake. A third fragment shows only the lake, but it reveals that there is a cabin on the
shore of the lake. Therefore, from looking at the overlapping information in these three fragments, you know that the
picture contains a mountain behind a lake that has a cabin on its shore. This is the principle behind reconstructing
entire DNA sequences using shotgun sequencing.

Originally, shotgun sequencing only analyzed one end of each fragment for overlaps. This was sufficient for
sequencing small genomes. However, the desire to sequence larger genomes, such as that of a human, led to
developing double-barrel shotgun sequencing, or pairwise-end sequencing. In pairwise-end sequencing, scientists
analyze each fragment’s end for overlap. Pairwise-end sequencing is, therefore, more cumbersome than shotgun
sequencing, but it is easier to reconstruct the sequence because there is more available information.
460   17 • Biotechnology and Genomics



      Next-generation Sequencing
      Since 2005, automated sequencing techniques used by laboratories are under the umbrella of next-generation
      sequencing (deep sequencing or massively parallel sequencing), which is a group of automated techniques used for
      rapid DNA sequencing. These automated low-cost sequencers can generate sequences of hundreds of thousands or
      millions of short fragments (25 to 500 base pairs) in the span of one day. These sequencers use sophisticated
      software to get through the cumbersome process of putting all the fragments in order.



              EVOLUTION CONNECTION

      Comparing Sequences
      A sequence alignment is an arrangement of proteins, DNA, or RNA. Scientists use it to identify similar regions
      between cell types or species, which may indicate function or structure conservation. We can use sequence
      alignments to construct phylogenetic trees. The following website uses a software program called BLAST (basic
      local alignment search tool) (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi).

      Under Web Blast,” click “Nucleotide Blast.” Input the following sequence into the large "query sequence" box:
      ATTGCTTCGATTGCA. Below the box, locate the "Organism" field and type "human" or "Homo sapiens". Then click
      “BLAST” to compare the inputted sequence against the human genome’s known sequences. The search will take
      some amount of time before the results are displayed. The result is that this sequence occurs in over a hundred
      places in the human genome. A list of descriptions of the matches is presented. Click on the Graphic Summary tab
      above the results and the results will be presented with the horizontal bars and you will see a short description of
      each of the matching hits. Pick one of the hits near the top of the list and click on alignment, and in the new window
      click on "Graphics". This will bring you to a page that shows the sequence’s location within the entire human
      genome. You can move the slider that looks like a colored flag back and forth to view the sequences immediately
      around the selected gene. You can then return to your selected sequence by clicking the "ATG" button.


      Use of Whole-Genome Sequences of Model Organisms
      British biochemist and Nobel Prize winner Fred Sanger used a bacterial virus, the bacteriophage fx174 (5368 base
      pairs), to completely sequence the first genome. Other scientists later sequenced several other organelle and viral
      genomes. American biotechnologist, biochemist, geneticist, and businessman Craig Venter sequenced the
      bacterium Haemophilus influenzae in the 1980s. Approximately 74 different laboratories collaborated on
      sequencing the genome of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which began in 1989 and was completed in 1996,
      because it was 60 times bigger than any other genome sequencing. By 1997, the genome sequences of two
      important model organisms were available: the bacterium Escherichia coli K12 and the yeast Saccharomyces
      cerevisiae. We now know the genomes of other model organisms, such as the mouse Mus musculus, the fruit fly
      Drosophila melanogaster, the nematode Caenorhabditis. elegans, and humans Homo sapiens. Researchers perform
      extensive basic research in model organisms because they can apply the information to genetically similar
      organisms. A model organism is a species that researchers use as a model to understand the biological processes
      in other species that the model organism represents. Having entire genomes sequenced helps with the research
      efforts in these model organisms. The process of attaching biological information to gene sequences is genome
      annotation. Annotating gene sequences helps with basic experiments in molecular biology, such as designing PCR
      primers and RNA targets.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      Click through each genome sequencing step at this site (https://openstax.org/l/DNA_sequence).


      Genome Sequence Uses
      DNA microarrays are methods that scientists use to detect gene expression by analyzing different DNA fragments
      that are fixed to a glass slide or a silicon chip to identify active genes and sequences. We can discover almost one
      million genotypic abnormalities using microarrays; whereas, whole-genome sequencing can provide information




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              17.4 • Applying Genomics   461



about all six billion base pairs in the human genome. Although studying genome sequencing with medical
applications is interesting, this discipline dwells on abnormal gene function. Knowing about the entire genome will
allow researchers to discover future onset diseases and other genetic disorders early. This will allow for more
informed decisions about lifestyle, medication, and having children. Genomics is still in its infancy, although
someday it may become routine to use whole-genome sequencing to screen every newborn to detect genetic
abnormalities.

In addition to disease and medicine, genomics can contribute to developing novel enzymes that convert biomass to
biofuel, which results in higher crop and fuel production, and lower consumer cost. This knowledge should allow
better methods of control over the microbes that industry uses to produce biofuels. Genomics could also improve
monitoring methods that measure the impact of pollutants on ecosystems and help clean up environmental
contaminants. Genomics has aided in developing agrochemicals and pharmaceuticals that could benefit medical
science and agriculture.

It sounds great to have all the knowledge we can get from whole-genome sequencing; however, humans have a
responsibility to use this knowledge wisely. Otherwise, it could be easy to misuse the power of such knowledge,
leading to discrimination based on a person's genetics, human genetic engineering, and other ethical concerns. This
information could also lead to legal issues regarding health and privacy.

17.4 Applying Genomics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Explain pharmacogenomics
   • Define polygenic

Introducing DNA sequencing and whole genome sequencing projects, particularly the Human Genome project, has
expanded the applicability of DNA sequence information. Many fields, such as metagenomics, pharmacogenomics,
and mitochondrial genomics are using genomics. Understanding and finding cures for diseases is the most common
application of genomics.

Predicting Disease Risk at the Individual Level
Predicting disease risk involves screening currently healthy individuals by genome analysis at the individual level.
Health care professionals can recommend intervention with lifestyle changes and drugs before disease onset.
However, this approach is most applicable when the problem resides within a single gene defect. Such defects only
account for approximately 5 percent of diseases in developed countries. Most of the common diseases, such as
heart disease, are multi-factored or polygenic, which is a phenotypic characteristic that involves two or more genes,
and also involve environmental factors such as diet. In April 2010, scientists at Stanford University published the
genome analysis of a healthy individual (Stephen Quake, a scientist at Stanford University, who had his genome
sequenced. The analysis predicted his propensity to acquire various diseases. The medical team performed a risk
assessment to analyze Quake’s percentage of risk for 55 different medical conditions. The team found a rare genetic
mutation, which showed him to be at risk for sudden heart attack. The results also predicted that Quake had a 23
percent risk of developing prostate cancer and a 1.4 percent risk of developing Alzheimer’s. The scientists used
databases and several publications to analyze the genomic data. Even though genomic sequencing is becoming
more affordable and analytical tools are becoming more reliable, researchers still must address ethical issues
surrounding genomic analysis at a population level.
462   17 • Biotechnology and Genomics




              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 17.15 PCA3 is a gene that is expressed in prostate epithelial cells and overexpressed in cancerous cells. A high PCA3
      concentration in urine is indicative of prostate cancer. The PCA3 test is a better indicator of cancer than the more well known PSA test,
      which measures the level of PSA (prostate-specific antigen) in the blood.

      In 2011, the United States Preventative Services Task Force recommended against using the PSA test to screen
      healthy people for prostate cancer. Their recommendation is based on evidence that screening does not reduce the
      risk of death from prostate cancer. Prostate cancer often develops very slowly and does not cause problems, while
      the cancer treatment can have severe side effects. The PCA3 test is more accurate, but screening may still result in
      people who would not have been harmed by the cancer itself suffering side effects from treatment. What do you
      think? Should healthy people receive prostate cancer screenings using the PCA3 or PSA test? Should people in
      general receive screenings to find out if they have a genetic risk for cancer or other diseases?


      Pharmacogenomics and Toxicogenomics
      Pharmacogenomics, or toxicogenomics, involves evaluating drug effectiveness and safety on the basis of
      information from an individual's genomic sequence. We can study genomic responses to drugs using experimental
      animals (such as laboratory rats or mice) or live cells in the laboratory before embarking on studies with humans.
      Studying changes in gene expression could provide information about the transcription profile in the drug's
      presence, which we can use as an early indicator of the potential for toxic effects. For example, genes involved in
      cellular growth and controlled cell death, when disturbed, could lead to cancerous cell growth. Genome-wide
      studies can also help to find new genes involved in drug toxicity. Medical professionals can use personal genome
      sequence information to prescribe medications that will be most effective and least toxic on the basis of the
      individual patient’s genotype. The gene signatures may not be completely accurate, but medical professionals can
      test them further before pathologic symptoms arise.

      Microbial Genomics: Metagenomics
      Traditionally, scholars have taught microbiology with the view that it is best to study microorganisms under pure
      culture conditions. This involves isolating a single cell type and culturing it in the laboratory. Because
      microorganisms can go through several generations in a matter of hours, their gene expression profiles adapt to the
      new laboratory environment very quickly. In addition, the vast majority of bacterial species resist culturing in
      isolation. Most microorganisms do not live as isolated entities, but in microbial communities or biofilms. For all of
      these reasons, pure culture is not always the best way to study microorganisms. Metagenomics is the study of the
      collective genomes of multiple species that grow and interact in an environmental niche. Metagenomics can be used
      to identify new species more rapidly and to analyze the effect of pollutants on the environment (Figure 17.16).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        17.4 • Applying Genomics   463




              FIGURE 17.16 Metagenomics involves isolating DNA from multiple species within an environmental niche.

Microbial Genomics: Creation of New Biofuels
Knowledge of the genomics of microorganisms is being used to find better ways to harness biofuels from algae and
cyanobacteria. The primary sources of fuel today are coal, oil, wood, and other plant products, such as ethanol.
Although plants are renewable resources, there is still a need to find more alternative renewable sources of energy
to meet our population’s energy demands. The microbial world is one of the largest resources for genes that encode
new enzymes and produce new organic compounds, and it remains largely untapped. Microorganisms are used to
create products, such as enzymes that are used in research, antibiotics, and other antimicrobial mechanisms.
Microbial genomics is helping to develop diagnostic tools, improved vaccines, new disease treatments, and
advanced environmental cleanup techniques.

Mitochondrial Genomics
Mitochondria are intracellular organelles that contain their own DNA. Mitochondrial DNA mutates at a rapid rate and
scientists often use it to study evolutionary relationships. Another feature that makes studying the mitochondrial
genome interesting is that the mitochondrial DNA in most multicellular organisms passes from the mother during
the fertilization process. For this reason, scientists often use mitochondrial genomics to trace genealogy.

Experts have used information and clues from DNA samples at crime scenes as evidence in court cases, and they
have used genetic markers in forensic analysis. Genomic analysis has also become useful in this field. The first
publication showcasing the first use of genomics in forensics came out in 2001. It was a collaborative attempt
between academic research institutions and the FBI to solve the mysterious cases of anthrax communicated via the
US Postal Service. Using microbial genomics, researchers determined that the culprit used a specific anthrax strain
in all the mailings.

Genomics in Agriculture
Genomics can reduce the trials and failures involved in scientific research to a certain extent, which could improve
agricultural crop yield quality and quantity. Linking traits to genes or gene signatures helps improve crop breeding to
generate hybrids with the most desirable qualities. Scientists use genomic data to identify desirable traits, and then
transfer those traits to a different organism. Researchers are discovering how genomics can improve agricultural
production's quality and quantity. For example, scientists could use desirable traits to create a useful product or
enhance an existing product, such as making a drought-sensitive crop more tolerant of the dry season.
464   17 • Biotechnology and Genomics




      17.5 Genomics and Proteomics
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Explain systems biology
         • Describe a proteome
         • Define protein signature

      Proteins are the final products of genes, which help perform the function that the gene encodes. Amino acids
      comprise proteins and play important roles in the cell. All enzymes (except ribozymes) are proteins that act as
      catalysts to affect the rate of reactions. Proteins are also regulatory molecules, and some are hormones. Transport
      proteins, such as hemoglobin, help transport oxygen to various organs. Antibodies that defend against foreign
      particles are also proteins. In the diseased state, protein function can be impaired because of changes at the
      genetic level or because of direct impact on a specific protein.

      A proteome is the entire set of proteins that a cell type produces. We can study proteoms using the knowledge of
      genomes because genes code for mRNAs, and the mRNAs encode proteins. Although mRNA analysis is a step in the
      right direction, not all mRNAs are translated into proteins. Proteomics is the study of proteomes' function.
      Proteomics complements genomics and is useful when scientists want to test their hypotheses that they based on
      genes. Even though all multicellular organisms' cells have the same set of genes, the set of proteins produced in
      different tissues is different and dependent on gene expression. Thus, the genome is constant, but the proteome
      varies and is dynamic within an organism. In addition, RNAs can be alternately spliced (cut and pasted to create
      novel combinations and novel proteins) and many proteins modify themselves after translation by processes such
      as proteolytic cleavage, phosphorylation, glycosylation, and ubiquitination. There are also protein-protein
      interactions, which complicate studying proteomes. Although the genome provides a blueprint, the final architecture
      depends on several factors that can change the progression of events that generate the proteome.

      Metabolomics is related to genomics and proteomics. Metabolomics involves studying small molecule metabolites
      in an organism. The metabolome is the complete set of metabolites that are related to an organism's genetic
      makeup. Metabolomics offers an opportunity to compare genetic makeup and physical characteristics, as well as
      genetic makeup and environmental factors. The goal of metabolome research is to identify, quantify, and catalogue
      all the metabolites in living organisms' tissues and fluids.

      Basic Techniques in Protein Analysis
      The ultimate goal of proteomics is to identify or compare the proteins expressed from a given genome under specific
      conditions, study the interactions between the proteins, and use the information to predict cell behavior or develop
      drug targets. Just as scientists analyze the genome using the basic DNA sequencing technique, proteomics requires
      techniques for protein analysis. The basic technique for protein analysis, analogous to DNA sequencing, is mass
      spectrometry. Mass spectrometry identifies and determines a molecule's characteristics. Advances in spectrometry
      have allowed researchers to analyze very small protein samples. X-ray crystallography, for example, enables
      scientists to determine a protein crystal's three-dimensional structure at atomic resolution. Another protein imaging
      technique, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), uses atoms' magnetic properties to determine the protein's three-
      dimensional structure in aqueous solution. Scientists have also used protein microarrays to study protein
      interactions. Large-scale adaptations of the basic two-hybrid screen (Figure 17.17) have provided the basis for
      protein microarrays. Scientists use computer software to analyze the vast amount of data for proteomic analysis.

      Genomic- and proteomic-scale analyses are part of systems biology, which is the study of whole biological systems
      (genomes and proteomes) based on interactions within the system. The European Bioinformatics Institute and the
      Human Proteome Organization (HUPO) are developing and establishing effective tools to sort through the enormous
      pile of systems biology data. Because proteins are the direct products of genes and reflect activity at the genomic
      level, it is natural to use proteomes to compare the protein profiles of different cells to identify proteins and genes
      involved in disease processes. Most pharmaceutical drug trials target proteins. Researchers use information that
      they obtain from proteomics to identify novel drugs and to understand their mechanisms of action.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         17.5 • Genomics and Proteomics       465




FIGURE 17.17 Scientists use two-hybrid screening to determine whether two proteins interact. In this method, a transcription factor splits
into a DNA-binding domain (BD) and an activator domain (AD). The binding domain is able to bind the promoter in the activator domain's
absence, but it does not turn on transcription. The bait protein attaches to the BD, and the prey protein attaches to the AD. Transcription
occurs only if the prey “catches” the bait.

Scientists are challenged when implementing proteomic analysis because it is difficult to detect small protein
quantities. Although mass spectrometry is good for detecting small protein amounts, variations in protein
expression in diseased states can be difficult to discern. Proteins are naturally unstable molecules, which makes
proteomic analysis much more difficult than genomic analysis.

Cancer Proteomics
Researchers are studying patients' genomes and proteomes to understand the genetic basis of diseases. The most
prominent disease researchers are studying with proteomic approaches is cancer. These approaches improve
screening and early cancer detection. Researchers are able to identify proteins whose expression indicates the
disease process. An individual protein is a biomarker; whereas, a set of proteins with altered expression levels is a
protein signature. For a biomarker or protein signature to be useful as a candidate for early cancer screening and
detection, they must secrete in body fluids, such as sweat, blood, or urine, such that health professionals can
perform large-scale screenings in a noninvasive fashion. The current problem with using biomarkers for early cancer
detection is the high rate of false-negative results. A false negative is an incorrect test result that should have been
positive. In other words, many cancer cases go undetected, which makes biomarkers unreliable. Some examples of
protein biomarkers in cancer detection are CA-125 for ovarian cancer and PSA for prostate cancer. Protein
signatures may be more reliable than biomarkers to detect cancer cells. Researchers are also using proteomics to
develop individualized treatment plans, which involves predicting whether or not an individual will respond to
specific drugs and the side effects that the individual may experience. Researchers also use proteomics to predict
the possibility of disease recurrence.

The National Cancer Institute has developed programs to improve cancer detection and treatment. The Clinical
Proteomic Technologies for Cancer and the Early Detection Research Network are efforts to identify protein
signatures specific to different cancer types. The Biomedical Proteomics Program identifies protein signatures and
designs effective therapies for cancer patients.
466   17 • Key Terms




Key Terms
antibiotic resistance ability of an organism to be             homologous chromosome pairs
   unaffected by an antibiotic's actions                    genetic testing process of testing for the presence of
biomarker individual protein that is uniquely                  disease-causing genes
   produced in a diseased state                             genetically modified organism (GMO) organism
biotechnology use of biological agents for                     whose genome has been artificially changed
   technological advancement                                genome annotation process of attaching biological
cDNA library collection of cloned cDNA sequences               information to gene sequences
cellular cloning production of identical cell               genome mapping process of finding the location of
   populations by binary fission                               genes on each chromosome
chain termination method method of DNA                      genomic library collection of cloned DNA which
   sequencing using labeled dideoxynucleotides to              represents all of the sequences and fragments from
   terminate DNA replication; it is also called the            a genome
   dideoxy method or the Sanger method                      genomics study of entire genomes including the
clone exact replica                                            complete set of genes, their nucleotide sequence
contig larger sequence of DNA assembled from                   and organization, and their interactions within a
   overlapping shorter sequences                               species and with other species
cytogenetic mapping technique that uses a                   host DNA DNA that is present in the genome of the
   microscope to create a map from stained                     organism of interest
   chromosomes                                              linkage analysis procedure that analyzes
deoxynucleotide individual DNA monomer (single                 recombining genes to determine if they are linked
   unit)                                                    lysis buffer solution to break the cell membrane and
dideoxynucleotide individual DNA monomer that is               release cell contents
   missing a hydroxyl group (–OH)                           metabolome complete set of metabolites which are
DNA microarray method to detect gene expression                related to an organism's genetic makeup
   by analyzing many DNA fragments that are fixed to a      metabolomics study of small molecule metabolites
   glass slide or a silicon chip to identify active genes      in an organism
   and identify sequences                                   metagenomics study of multiple species' collective
expressed sequence tag (EST) short STS that is                 genomes that grow and interact in an environmental
   identified with cDNA                                        niche
false negative incorrect test result that should have       microsatellite polymorphism variation between
   been positive                                               individuals in the sequence and number of
foreign DNA DNA that belongs to a different species            microsatellite DNA repeats
   or DNA that is artificially synthesized                  model organism species that researchers study and
gel electrophoresis technique used to separate                 use as a model to understand the biological
   molecules on the basis of size using electric charge        processes in other species represented by the
gene targeting method for altering the sequence of a           model organism
   specific gene by introducing the modified version on     molecular cloning cloning of DNA fragments
   a vector                                                 multiple cloning site (MCS) site that multiple
gene therapy technique used to cure inheritable                restriction endonucleases can recognize
   diseases by replacing mutant genes with good             next-generation sequencing group of automated
   genes                                                       techniques for rapid DNA sequencing
genetic diagnosis diagnosis of the potential for            Northern blotting transfer of RNA from a gel to a
   disease development by analyzing disease-causing            nylon membrane
   genes                                                    pharmacogenomics study of drug interactions with
genetic engineering alteration of the genetic makeup           the genome or proteome; also called
   of an organism                                              toxicogenomics
genetic map outline of genes and their location on a        physical map representation of the physical distance
   chromosome                                                  between genes or genetic markers
genetic marker gene or sequence on a chromosome             polygenic phenotypic characteristic caused by two or
   with a known location that is associated with a             more genes
   specific trait                                           polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique to
genetic recombination DNA exchange between                     amplify DNA



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         17 • Chapter Summary   467



probe small DNA fragment to determine if the                   starting with the gene product
   complementary sequence is present in a DNA               reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) PCR technique
   sample                                                      that involves converting RNA to DNA by reverse
protease enzyme that breaks down proteins                      transcriptase
protein signature set of uniquely expressed proteins        ribonuclease enzyme that breaks down RNA
   in the diseased state                                    sequence mapping mapping information obtained
proteome entire set of proteins that cell type                 after DNA sequencing
   produces                                                 shotgun sequencing method used to sequence
proteomics study of proteomes' function                        multiple DNA fragments to generate the sequence
pure culture growth of a single cell type in the               of a large piece of DNA
   laboratory                                               single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variation
radiation hybrid mapping information obtained by               between individuals in a single nucleotide
   fragmenting the chromosome with x-rays                   Southern blotting DNA transfer from a gel to a nylon
recombinant DNA combining DNA fragments that                   membrane
   molecular cloning generates that do not exist in         systems biology study of whole biological systems
   nature; also a chimeric molecule                            (genomes and proteomes) based on interactions
recombinant protein a gene's protein product                   within the system
   derived by molecular cloning                             Ti plasmid plasmid system derived from
reproductive cloning entire organism cloning                   Agrobacterium tumefaciens that scientists have
restriction endonuclease enzyme that can recognize             used to introduce foreign DNA into plant cells
   and cleave specific DNA sequences                        transgenic organism that receives DNA from a
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)                different species
   variation between individuals in the length of DNA       variable number of tandem repeats (VNTRs)
   fragments, which restriction endonucleases                  variation in the number of tandem repeats between
   generate                                                    individuals in the population
reverse genetics method of determining the gene's           whole-genome sequencing process that determines
   function by starting with the gene itself instead of        an entire genome's DNA sequence

Chapter Summary
17.1 Biotechnology                                          17.2 Mapping Genomes
Nucleic acids can be isolated from cells for the            Genome mapping is similar to solving a big,
purposes of further analysis by breaking open the cells     complicated puzzle with pieces of information coming
and enzymatically destroying all other major                from laboratories all over the world. Genetic maps
macromolecules. Fragmented or whole chromosomes             provide an outline for locating genes within a genome,
can separate on the basis of size by gel                    and they estimate the distance between genes and
electrophoresis. PCR can amplify short DNA or RNA           genetic markers on the basis of recombination
stretches. Researchers can use Southern and Northern        frequencies during meiosis. Physical maps provide
blotting to detect the presence of specific short           detailed information about the physical distance
sequences in a DNA or RNA sample. The term “cloning”        between the genes. The most detailed information is
may refer to cloning small DNA fragments (molecular         available through sequence mapping. Researchers
cloning), cloning cell populations (cellular cloning), or   combine information from all mapping and sequencing
cloning entire organisms (reproductive cloning).            sources to study an entire genome.
Medical professionals perform genetic testing to
identify disease-causing genes, and use gene therapy
                                                            17.3 Whole-Genome Sequencing
to cure an inheritable disease.                             Whole-genome sequencing is the latest available
                                                            resource to treat genetic diseases. Some doctors are
Transgenic organisms possess DNA from a different
                                                            using whole-genome sequencing to save lives.
species, usually generated by molecular cloning
                                                            Genomics has many industrial applications including
techniques. Vaccines, antibiotics, and hormones are
                                                            biofuel development, agriculture, pharmaceuticals, and
examples of products obtained by recombinant DNA
                                                            pollution control. The basic principle of all modern-day
technology. Scientists usually create transgenic plants
                                                            sequencing strategies involves the chain termination
to improve crop plant characteristics.
                                                            method of sequencing.
468   17 • Visual Connection Questions



Although the human genome sequences provide key               17.5 Genomics and Proteomics
insights to medical professionals, researchers use
                                                              Proteomics is the study of the entire set of proteins
whole-genome sequences of model organisms to
                                                              expressed by a given type of cell under certain
better understand the species' genome. Automation
                                                              environmental conditions. In a multicellular organism,
and the decreased cost of whole-genome sequencing
                                                              different cell types will have different proteomes, and
may lead to personalized medicine in the future.
                                                              these will vary with environmental changes. Unlike a
17.4 Applying Genomics                                        genome, a proteome is dynamic and in constant flux,
                                                              which makes it both more complicated and more
Imagination is the only barrier to the applicability of
                                                              useful than the knowledge of genomes alone.
genomics. Researchers are applying genomics to most
fields of biology. They use it for personalized medicine,     Proteomics approaches rely on protein analysis.
prediction of disease risks at an individual level,           Researchers are constantly upgrading these
studying drug interactions before conducting clinical         techniques. Researchers have used proteomics to
trials, and studying microorganisms in the environment        study different cancer types. Medical professionals are
as opposed to the laboratory. They are also applying it       using different biomarkers and protein signatures to
to developments such as generating new biofuels,              analyze each cancer type. The future goal is to have a
genealogical assessment using mitochondria,                   personalized treatment plan for each individual.
advances in forensic science, and improvements in
agriculture.

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 17.7 You are working in a molecular                    Preventative Services Task Force recommended
      biology lab and, unbeknownst to you, your lab                 against using the PSA test to screen healthy
      partner left the foreign genomic DNA that you                 people for prostate cancer. Their
      are planning to clone on the lab bench overnight              recommendation is based on evidence that
      instead of storing it in the freezer. As a result, it         screening does not reduce the risk of death from
      was degraded by nucleases, but still used in the              prostate cancer. Prostate cancer often develops
      experiment. The plasmid, on the other hand, is                very slowly and does not cause problems, while
      fine. What results would you expect from your                 the cancer treatment can have severe side
      molecular cloning experiment?                                 effects. The PCA3 test is more accurate, but
         a. There will be no colonies on the bacterial              screening may still result in people who would
             plate.                                                 not have been harmed by the cancer itself
         b. There will be blue colonies only.                       suffering side effects from treatment. What do
         c. There will be blue and white colonies.                  you think? Should healthy people be screened
         d. The will be white colonies only.                        for prostate cancer using the PCA3 or PSA test?
                                                                    Should people in general be screened to find out
   2. Figure 17.8 Do you think Dolly was a Finn-Dorset              if they have a genetic risk for cancer or other
      or a Scottish Blackface sheep?                                diseases?

   3. Figure 17.15 In 2011, the United States

Review Questions
   4. GMOs are created by ________.                                   b. by PCR
       a. generating genomic DNA fragments with                       c. of tissues to cure inheritable disease
          restriction endonucleases                                   d. all of the above
       b. introducing recombinant DNA into an
          organism by any means                                  6. Insulin produced by molecular cloning:
       c. overexpressing proteins in E. coli                          a. is of pig origin
       d. all of the above                                            b. is a recombinant protein
                                                                      c. is made by the human pancreas
   5. Gene therapy can be used to introduce foreign                   d. is recombinant DNA
      DNA into cells ________.
       a. for molecular cloning                                  7. Bt toxin is considered to be ________.




Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  17 • Review Questions     469



      a. a gene for modifying insect DNA              15. Whole-genome sequencing can be used for
      b. an organic insecticide produced by               advances in:
         bacteria                                           a. the medical field
      c. useful for humans to fight against insects         b. agriculture
      d. a recombinant protein                              c. biofuels
                                                            d. all of the above
 8. The Flavr Savr Tomato:
      a. is a variety of vine-ripened tomato in the   16. Sequencing an individual person’s genome
          supermarket                                       a. is currently possible
      b. was created to have better flavor and              b. could lead to legal issues regarding
          shelf-life                                           discrimination and privacy
      c. does not undergo soft rot                          c. could help make informed choices about
      d. all of the above                                      medical treatment
                                                            d. all of the above
 9. ESTs are ________.
      a. generated after a cDNA library is made       17. What is the most challenging issue facing
      b. unique sequences in the genome                   genome sequencing?
      c. useful for mapping using sequence                  a. the inability to develop fast and accurate
          information                                          sequencing techniques
      d. all of the above                                   b. the ethics of using information from
                                                               genomes at the individual level
10. Linkage analysis ________.                              c. the availability and stability of DNA
      a. is used to create a physical map                   d. all of the above
      b. is based on the natural recombination
          process                                     18. Genomics can be used in agriculture to:
      c. requires radiation hybrid mapping                 a. generate new hybrid strains
      d. involves breaking and rejoining of DNA            b. improve disease resistance
          artificially                                      c. improve yield
                                                           d. all of the above
11. Genetic recombination occurs by which process?
     a. independent assortment                        19. Genomics can be used on a personal level to:
     b. crossing over                                      a. decrease transplant rejection
      c. chromosome segregation                            b. predict genetic diseases that a person may
     d. sister chromatids                                      have inherited
                                                            c. determine the risks of genetic diseases for
12. Individual genetic maps in a given species are:            an individual’s children
      a. genetically similar                               d. all of the above
      b. genetically identical
      c. genetically dissimilar                       20. What is a biomarker?
      d. not useful in species analysis                    a. the color coding of different genes
                                                           b. a protein that is uniquely produced in a
13. Information obtained by microscopic analysis of            diseased state
    stained chromosomes is used in:                        c. a molecule in the genome or proteome
      a. radiation hybrid mapping                          d. a marker that is genetically inherited
      b. sequence mapping
      c. RFLP mapping                                 21. A protein signature is:
      d. cytogenetic mapping                                a. the path followed by a protein after it is
                                                                synthesized in the nucleus
14. The chain termination method of sequencing:             b. the path followed by a protein in the
      a. uses labeled ddNTPs                                    cytoplasm
      b. uses only dideoxynucleotides                       c. a protein expressed on the cell surface
      c. uses only deoxynucleotides                         d. a unique set of proteins present in a
      d. uses labeled dNTPs                                     diseased state
470   17 • Critical Thinking Questions




Critical Thinking Questions
  22. Describe the process of Southern blotting.          27. How could a genetic map of the human genome
                                                              help find a cure for cancer?
  23. A researcher wants to study cancer cells from a
      patient with breast cancer. Is cloning the cancer   28. Explain why metagenomics is probably the most
      cells an option?                                        revolutionary application of genomics.

  24. How would a scientist introduce a gene for          29. How can genomics be used to predict disease
      herbicide resistance into a plant?                      risk and treatment options?

  25. If you had a chance to get your genome              30. How has proteomics been used in cancer
      sequenced, what are some questions you might            detection and treatment?
      be able to have answered about yourself?
                                                          31. What is personalized medicine?
  26. Why is so much effort being poured into genome
      mapping applications?




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 18
Evolution and the Origin of Species




FIGURE 18.1 All organisms are products of evolution adapted to their environment. (a) Saguaro (Carnegiea
gigantea) can soak up 750 liters of water in a single rain storm, enabling these cacti to survive the dry conditions of
the Sonora desert in Mexico and the Southwestern United States. (b) The Andean semiaquatic lizard (Potamites
montanicola) discovered in Peru in 2010 lives between 1,570 to 2,100 meters in elevation, and, unlike most lizards,
is nocturnal and swims. Scientists still do not know how these cold-blood animals are able to move in the cold (10 to
15°C) temperatures of the Andean night. (credit a: modification of work by Gentry George, U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service; credit b: modification of work by Germán Chávez and Diego Vásquez, ZooKeys)


CHAPTER OUTLINE
18.1 Understanding Evolution
18.2 Formation of New Species
18.3 Reconnection and Speciation Rates


INTRODUCTION All living organisms, from bacteria to baboons to blueberries, evolved at some
point from a different species. Although it may seem that living things today stay much the same,
that is not the case—evolution is an ongoing process.

The theory of evolution is the unifying theory of biology, meaning it is the framework within which
biologists ask questions about the living world. Its power is that it provides direction for
predictions about living things that are borne out in ongoing experiments. The Ukrainian-born
American geneticist Theodosius Dobzhansky famously wrote that “nothing makes sense in biology
                                  1
except in the light of evolution.” He meant that the tenet that all life has evolved and diversified
from a common ancestor is the foundation from which we approach all questions in biology.

18.1 Understanding Evolution
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Describe how scientists developed the present-day theory of evolution
   • Define adaptation
   • Explain convergent and divergent evolution
   • Describe homologous and vestigial structures
   • Discuss misconceptions about the theory of evolution

Evolution by natural selection describes a mechanism for how species change over time.
Scientists, philosophers, researchers, and others had made suggestions and debated this topic
well before Darwin began to explore this idea. Classical Greek philosopher Plato emphasized in his

1 Theodosius Dobzhansky. “Biology, Molecular and Organismic.” American Zoologist 4, no. 4 (1964): 449.
472   18 • Evolution and the Origin of Species



      writings that species were static and unchanging, yet there were also ancient Greeks who
      expressed evolutionary ideas. In the eighteenth century, naturalist Georges-Louis Leclerc Comte
      de Buffon reintroduced ideas about the evolution of animals and observed that various geographic
      regions have different plant and animal populations, even when the environments are similar.
      Some at this time also accepted that there were extinct species.

      Also during the eighteenth century, James Hutton, a Scottish geologist and naturalist, proposed
      that geological change occurred gradually by accumulating small changes from processes
      operating like they are today over long periods of time. This contrasted with the predominant view
      that the planet's geology was a consequence of catastrophic events occurring during a relatively
      brief past. Nineteenth century geologist Charles Lyell popularized Hutton's view. A friend to
      Darwin. Lyell’s ideas were influential on Darwin’s thinking: Lyell’s notion of the greater age of Earth
      gave more time for gradual change in species, and the process of change provided an analogy for
      this change. In the early nineteenth century, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck published a book that
      detailed a mechanism for evolutionary change. We now refer to this mechanism as an inheritance
      of acquired characteristics by which the environment causes modifications in an individual, or
      offspring could use or disuse of a structure during its lifetime, and thus bring about change in a
      species. While many discredited this mechanism for evolutionary change, Lamarck’s ideas were an
      important influence on evolutionary thought.

      Charles Darwin and Natural Selection
      In the mid-nineteenth century, two naturalists, Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace,
      independently conceived and described the actual mechanism for evolution. Importantly, each
      naturalist spent time exploring the natural world on expeditions to the tropics. From 1831 to
      1836, Darwin traveled around the world on H.M.S. Beagle, including stops in South America,
      Australia, and the southern tip of Africa. Wallace traveled to Brazil to collect insects in the Amazon
      rainforest from 1848 to 1852 and to the Malay Archipelago from 1854 to 1862. Darwin’s journey,
      like Wallace’s later journeys to the Malay Archipelago, included stops at several island chains, the
      last being the Galápagos Islands west of Ecuador. On these islands, Darwin observed species of
      organisms on different islands that were clearly similar, yet had distinct differences. For example,
      the ground finches inhabiting the Galápagos Islands comprised several species with a unique
      beak shape (Figure 18.2). The species on the islands had a graded series of beak sizes and shapes
      with very small differences between the most similar. He observed that these finches closely
      resembled another finch species on the South American mainland. Darwin imagined that the
      island species might be species modified from one of the original mainland species. Upon further
      study, he realized that each finch's varied beaks helped the birds acquire a specific type of food.
      For example, seed-eating finches had stronger, thicker beaks for breaking seeds, and insect-eating
      finches had spear-like beaks for stabbing their prey.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     18.1 • Understanding Evolution    473




FIGURE 18.2 Darwin observed that beak shape varies among finch species. He postulated that ancestral species' beaks had adapted over
time to equip the finches to acquire different food sources.

Wallace and Darwin both observed similar patterns in other organisms and they independently developed the same
explanation for how and why such changes could take place. Darwin called this mechanism natural selection.
Natural selection, or “survival of the fittest,” is the more prolific reproduction of individuals with favorable traits
that survive environmental change because of those traits. This leads to evolutionary change.

For example, Darwin observed a population of giant tortoises in the Galápagos Archipelago to have longer necks
than those that lived on other islands with dry lowlands. These tortoises were “selected” because they could reach
more leaves and access more food than those with short necks. In times of drought when fewer leaves would be
available, those that could reach more leaves had a better chance to eat and survive than those that couldn’t reach
the food source. Consequently, long-necked tortoises would be more likely to be reproductively successful and pass
the long-necked trait to their offspring. Over time, only long-necked tortoises would be present in the population.

Natural selection, Darwin argued, was an inevitable outcome of three principles that operated in nature. First, most
characteristics of organisms are inherited, or passed from parent to offspring. Although no one, including Darwin
and Wallace, knew how this happened at the time, it was a common understanding. Second, more offspring are
produced than are able to survive, so resources for survival and reproduction are limited. The capacity for
reproduction in all organisms outstrips the availability of resources to support their numbers. Thus, there is
competition for those resources in each generation. Both Darwin and Wallace’s understanding of this principle came
from reading economist Thomas Malthus' essay that explained this principle in relation to human populations. Third,
offspring vary among each other in regard to their characteristics and those variations are inherited. Darwin and
Wallace reasoned that offspring with inherited characteristics which allow them to best compete for limited
resources will survive and have more offspring than those individuals with variations that are less able to compete.
Because characteristics are inherited, these traits will be better represented in the next generation. This will lead to
change in populations over generations in a process that Darwin called descent with modification. Ultimately,
natural selection leads to greater adaptation of the population to its local environment. It is the only mechanism
known for adaptive evolution.

In 1858, Darwin and Wallace (Figure 18.3) presented papers at the Linnean Society in London that discussed the
idea of natural selection. The following year Darwin’s book, On the Origin of Species, was published. His book
outlined in considerable detail his arguments for evolution by natural selection.
474   18 • Evolution and the Origin of Species




      FIGURE 18.3 Both (a) Charles Darwin and (b) Alfred Wallace wrote scientific papers on natural selection that they presented together at the
      Linnean Society in 1858.

      Studies of evolution by natural selection are difficult to conduct, as they require analyses of several generations of
      the investigated species in order to document the changes pointing to evolutionary change. The Galápagos finches
      are an excellent example. Peter and Rosemary Grant and their colleagues have studied Galápagos finch populations
      every year since 1976 and have provided important evidence of natural selection. The Grants found changes from
      one generation to the next in beak shape distribution with the medium ground finch on the Galápagos island of
      Daphne Major. The birds have inherited a variation in their bill shape with some having wide deep bills and others
      having thinner bills. During a period in which rainfall was higher than normal because of an El Niño, there was a lack
      of large hard seeds of which the large-billed birds ate; however, there was an abundance of the small soft seeds
      which the small-billed birds ate. Therefore, the small-billed birds were able to survive and reproduce. In the years
      following this El Niño, the Grants measured beak sizes in the population and found that the average bill size was
      smaller. Since bill size is an inherited trait, parents with smaller bills had more offspring and the bill evolved into a
      much smaller size. As conditions improved in 1987 and larger seeds became more available, the trend toward
      smaller average bill size ceased.



              CAREER CONNECTION

      Field Biologist
      Many people hike, explore caves, scuba dive, or climb mountains for recreation. People often participate in these
      activities hoping to see wildlife. Experiencing the outdoors can be incredibly enjoyable and invigorating. What if your
      job entailed working in the wilderness? Field biologists by definition work outdoors in the “field.” The term field in
      this case refers to any location outdoors, even under water. A field biologist typically focuses research on a certain
      species, group of organisms, or a single habitat (Figure 18.4).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        18.1 • Understanding Evolution   475




                       FIGURE 18.4 A field biologist tranquilizes a polar bear for study. (credit: Karen Rhode)

One objective of many field biologists includes discovering new, unrecorded species. Not only do such findings
expand our understanding of the natural world, but they also lead to important innovations in fields such as
medicine and agriculture. Plant and microbial species, in particular, can reveal new medicinal and nutritive
knowledge. Other organisms can play key roles in ecosystems or if rare require protection. When discovered,
researchers can use these important species as evidence for environmental regulations and laws.


Processes and Patterns of Evolution
Natural selection can only take place if there is variation, or differences, among individuals in a population.
Importantly, these differences must have some genetic basis; otherwise, the selection will not lead to change in the
next generation. This is critical because nongenetic reasons can cause variation among individuals such as an
individual's height because of better nutrition rather than different genes.

Genetic diversity in a population comes from two main mechanisms: mutation and sexual reproduction. Mutation, a
change in DNA, is the ultimate source of new alleles, or new genetic variation in any population. The genetic changes
that mutation causes can have one of three outcomes on the phenotype. A mutation affects the organism's
phenotype in a way that gives it reduced fitness—lower likelihood of survival or fewer offspring. A mutation may
produce a phenotype with a beneficial effect on fitness. Many mutations will also have no effect on the phenotype's
fitness. We call these neutral mutations. Mutations may also have a whole range of effect sizes on the organism's
fitness that expresses them in their phenotype, from a small effect to a great effect. Sexual reproduction also leads
to genetic diversity: when two parents reproduce, unique combinations of alleles assemble to produce the unique
genotypes and thus phenotypes in each offspring.

We call a heritable trait that helps an organism's survival and reproduction in its present environment an
adaptation. Scientists describe groups of organisms adapting to their environment when a genetic variation occurs
over time that increases or maintains the population's “fit” to its environment. A platypus's webbed feet are an
adaptation for swimming. A snow leopard's thick fur is an adaptation for living in the cold. A cheetah's fast speed is
an adaptation for catching prey.

Whether or not a trait is favorable depends on the current environmental conditions. The same traits are not always
selected because environmental conditions can change. For example, consider a plant species that grew in a moist
climate and did not need to conserve water. Large leaves were selected because they allowed the plant to obtain
more energy from the sun. Large leaves require more water to maintain than small leaves, and the moist
environment provided favorable conditions to support large leaves. After thousands of years, the climate changed,
and the area no longer had excess water. The direction of natural selection shifted so that plants with small leaves
were selected because those populations were able to conserve water to survive the new environmental conditions.

The evolution of species has resulted in enormous variation in form and function. Sometimes, evolution gives rise to
476   18 • Evolution and the Origin of Species



      groups of organisms that become tremendously different from each other. We call two species that evolve in diverse
      directions from a common point divergent evolution. We can see such divergent evolution in the forms of the
      reproductive organs of flowering plants which share the same basic anatomies; however, they can look very
      different as a result of selection in different physical environments and adaptation to different kinds of pollinators
      (Figure 18.5).




      FIGURE 18.5 Flowering plants evolved from a common ancestor. Notice that the (a) dense blazing star (Liatrus spicata) and the (b) purple
      coneflower (Echinacea purpurea) vary in appearance, yet both share a similar basic morphology. (credit a: modification of work by Drew
      Avery; credit b: modification of work by Cory Zanker)

      In other cases, similar phenotypes evolve independently in distantly related species. For example, flight has evolved
      in both bats and insects, and they both have structures we refer to as wings, which are adaptations to flight.
      However, bat and insect wings have evolved from very different original structures. We call this phenomenon
      convergent evolution, where similar traits evolve independently in species that do not share a recent common
      ancestry. The trait in the two species came to be similar in structure and have the same function, flying, but did so
      separately from each other.

      These physical changes occur over enormous time spans and help explain how evolution occurs. Natural selection
      acts on individual organisms, which can then shape an entire species. Although natural selection may work in a
      single generation on an individual, it can take thousands or even millions of years for an entire species' genotype to
      evolve. It is over these large time spans that life on earth has changed and continues to change.

      Evidence of Evolution
      The evidence for evolution is compelling and extensive. Looking at every level of organization in living systems,
      biologists see the signature of past and present evolution. Darwin dedicated a large portion of his book, On the
      Origin of Species, to identifying patterns in nature that were consistent with evolution, and since Darwin, our
      understanding has become clearer and broader.

      Fossils
      Fossils provide solid evidence that organisms from the past are not the same as those today, and fossils show the
      gradual evolutionary changes over time. Scientists determine the age of fossils and categorize them from all over the
      world to determine when the organisms lived relative to each other. The resulting fossil record tells the story of the
      past and shows the evolution of form over millions of years (Figure 18.6). For example, scientists have recovered
      highly detailed records showing the evolution of humans and horses (Figure 18.6). The whale flipper shares a similar
      morphology to bird and mammal appendages (Figure 18.7) indicating that these species share a common ancestor.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          18.1 • Understanding Evolution     477




FIGURE 18.6 In this (a) display, fossil hominids are arranged from oldest (bottom) to newest (top). As hominids evolved, the skull's shape
changed. An artist’s rendition of (b) extinct species of the genus Equus reveals that these ancient species resembled the modern horse
(Equus ferus) but varied in size.

Anatomy and Embryology
Another type of evidence for evolution is the presence of structures in organisms that share the same basic form.
For example, the bones in human, dog, bird, and whale appendages all share the same overall construction (Figure
18.7) resulting from their origin in a common ancestor's appendages. Over time, evolution led to changes in the
bones' shapes and sizes in different species, but they have maintained the same overall layout. Scientists call these
synonymous parts homologous structures.




           FIGURE 18.7 The similar construction of these appendages indicates that these organisms share a common ancestor.

Some structures exist in organisms that have no apparent function at all, and appear to be residual parts from a past
common ancestor. We call these unused structures without function vestigial structures. Other examples of
vestigial structures are wings on flightless birds, leaves on some cacti, and hind leg bones in whales. Not all
similarities represent homologous structures. As explained in Determining Evolutionary Relationships, when similar
characteristics occur because of environmental constraints and not due to a close evolutionary relationship, it is an
analogy or homoplasy. For example, insects use wings to fly like bats and birds, but the wing structure and
embryonic origin are completely different. These are analogous structures (Figure 20.8). On the other side, the bird
and bat wings are homologous because the bones are inherited from a common ancestor, while the wings
themselves are analogous as they evolved independently.

     LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/bone_structures) exploring the bones in the human body.


Another piece of evidence of evolution is the convergence of form in organisms that share similar environments. For
example, species of unrelated animals, such as the arctic fox and ptarmigan, living in the arctic region have been
selected for seasonal white phenotypes during winter to blend with the snow and ice (Figure 18.8). These
478   18 • Evolution and the Origin of Species



      similarities occur not because of common ancestry, but because of similar selection pressures—the benefits of
      predators not seeing them.




      FIGURE 18.8 The white winter coat of the (a) arctic fox and the (b) ptarmigan’s plumage are adaptations to their environments. (credit a:
      modification of work by Keith Morehouse)

      Embryology, the study of the anatomy of an organism's development to its adult form, also provides evidence of
      relatedness between now widely divergent groups of organisms. Mutational tweaking in the embryo can have such
      magnified consequences in the adult that embryo formation tends to be conserved. As a result, structures that are
      absent in some groups often appear in their embryonic forms and disappear when they reach the adult or juvenile
      form. For example, all vertebrate embryos, including humans, exhibit gill slits and tails at some point in their early
      development. These disappear in the adults of terrestrial groups but adult forms of aquatic groups such as fish and
      some amphibians maintain them. Great ape embryos, including humans, have a tail structure during their
      development that they lose when they are born.

      Biogeography
      The geographic distribution of organisms on the planet follows patterns that we can explain best by evolution in
      conjunction with tectonic plate movement over geological time. Broad groups that evolved before the
      supercontinent Pangaea broke up (about 200 million years ago) are distributed worldwide. Groups that evolved
      since the breakup appear uniquely in regions of the planet, such as the unique flora and fauna of northern
      continents that formed from the supercontinent Laurasia and of the southern continents that formed from the
      supercontinent Gondwana. The presence of members of the plant family Proteaceae in Australia, southern Africa,
      and South America indicates that their ancestors were predominant on the supercontinent Gondwana prior to its
      breaking up.

      Marsupial diversification in Australia and the absence of other mammals reflect Australia’s long isolation. Australia
      has an abundance of endemic species—species found nowhere else—which is typical of islands whose isolation by
      expanses of water prevents species from migrating. Over time, these species diverge evolutionarily into new species
      that look very different from their ancestors that may exist on the mainland. Australia's marsupials, the Galápagos'
      finches, and many species on the Hawaiian Islands are all unique to their one point of origin, yet they display distant
      relationships to ancestral species on mainlands.

      Molecular Biology
      Like anatomical structures, the molecular structures of life reflect descent with modification. DNA's universality
      reflects evidence of a common ancestor for all of life. Fundamental divisions in life between the genetic code, DNA
      replication, and expression are reflected in major structural differences in otherwise conservative structures such as
      ribosome components and membrane structures. In general, the relatedness of groups of organisms is reflected in
      the similarity of their DNA sequences—exactly the pattern that we would expect from descent and diversification
      from a common ancestor.

      DNA sequences have also shed light on some of the mechanisms of evolution. For example, it is clear that the



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                18.1 • Understanding Evolution   479



evolution of new functions for proteins commonly occurs after gene duplication events that allow freely modifying
one copy by mutation, selection, or drift (changes in a population’s gene pool resulting from chance), while the
second copy continues to produce a functional protein.

Misconceptions of Evolution
Although the theory of evolution generated some controversy when Darwin first proposed it, biologists almost
universally accepted it, particularly younger biologists, within 20 years after publication of On the Origin of Species.
Nevertheless, the theory of evolution is a difficult concept and misconceptions about how it works abound.

     LINK TO LEARNING
This site (https://openstax.org/l/misconceptions) addresses some of the main misconceptions associated with the
theory of evolution.


Evolution Is Just a Theory
Critics of the theory of evolution dismiss its importance by purposefully confounding the everyday usage of the word
“theory” with the way scientists use the word. In science, we understand a “theory” to be a body of thoroughly
tested and verified explanations for a set of observations of the natural world. Scientists have a theory of the atom, a
theory of gravity, and the theory of relativity, each which describes understood facts about the world. In the same
way, the theory of evolution describes facts about the living world. As such, a theory in science has survived
significant efforts to discredit it by scientists. In contrast, a “theory” in common vernacular is a word meaning a
guess or suggested explanation. This meaning is more akin to the scientific concept of “hypothesis.” When critics of
evolution say it is “just a theory,” they are implying that there is little evidence supporting it and that it is still in the
process of rigorous testing. This is a mischaracterization.

Individuals Evolve
Evolution is the change in a population's genetic composition over time, specifically over generations, resulting from
differential reproduction of individuals with certain alleles. Individuals do change over their lifetime, obviously, but
this is development and involves changes programmed by the set of genes the individual acquired at birth in
coordination with the individual’s environment. When thinking about the evolution of a characteristic, it is probably
best to think about the change of the average value of the characteristic in the population over time. For example,
when natural selection leads to bill-size change in medium ground finches in the Galápagos, this does not mean that
individual bills on the finches are changing. If one measures the average bill size among all individuals in the
population at one time and then measures them in the population several years later, this average value will be
different as a result of evolution. Although some individuals may survive from the first time to the second, they will
still have the same bill size; however, there will be many new individuals who contribute to the shift in average bill
size.

Evolution Explains the Origin of Life
It is a common misunderstanding that evolution includes an explanation of life’s origins. Some of the theory’s critics
believe that it cannot explain the origin of life. The theory does not try to explain the origin of life. The theory of
evolution explains how populations change over time and how life diversifies the origin of species. It does not shed
light on the beginnings of life including the origins of the first cells, which define life. Importantly, biologists believe
that the presence of life on Earth precludes the possibility that the events that led to life on Earth can repeat
themselves because the intermediate stages would immediately become food for existing living things.

However, once a mechanism of inheritance was in place in the form of a molecule like DNA either within a cell or
pre-cell, these entities would be subject to the principle of natural selection. More effective reproducers would
increase in frequency at the expense of inefficient reproducers. While evolution does not explain the origin of life, it
may have something to say about some of the processes operating once pre-living entities acquired certain
properties.

Organisms Evolve on Purpose
Statements such as “organisms evolve in response to a change in an environment” are quite common, but such
statements can lead to two types of misunderstandings. First, do not interpret the statement to mean that individual
480   18 • Evolution and the Origin of Species



      organisms evolve. The statement is shorthand for “a population evolves in response to a changing environment.”
      However, a second misunderstanding may arise by interpreting the statement to mean that the evolution is
      somehow intentional. A changed environment results in some individuals in the population, those with particular
      phenotypes, benefiting and therefore producing proportionately more offspring than other phenotypes. This results
      in change in the population if the characteristics are genetically determined.

      It is also important to understand that the variation that natural selection works on is already in a population and
      does not arise in response to an environmental change. For example, applying antibiotics to a population of bacteria
      will, over time, select a population of bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics. The resistance, which a gene causes,
      did not arise by mutation because of applying the antibiotic. The gene for resistance was already present in the
      bacteria's gene pool, likely at a low frequency. The antibiotic, which kills the bacterial cells without the resistance
      gene, strongly selects individuals that are resistant, since these would be the only ones that survived and divided.
      Experiments have demonstrated that mutations for antibiotic resistance do not arise as a result of antibiotic
      application.

      In a larger sense, evolution is not goal directed. Species do not become “better” over time. They simply track their
      changing environment with adaptations that maximize their reproduction in a particular environment at a particular
      time. Evolution has no goal of making faster, bigger, more complex, or even smarter species, despite the
      commonness of this kind of language in popular discourse. What characteristics evolve in a species are a function of
      the variation present and the environment, both of which are constantly changing in a nondirectional way. A trait
      that fits in one environment at one time may well be fatal at some point in the future. This holds equally well for
      insect and human species.

      18.2 Formation of New Species
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Define species and describe how scientists identify species as different
         • Describe genetic variables that lead to speciation
         • Identify prezygotic and postzygotic reproductive barriers
         • Explain allopatric and sympatric speciation
         • Describe adaptive radiation

      Although all life on earth shares various genetic similarities, only certain organisms combine genetic information by
      sexual reproduction and have offspring that can then successfully reproduce. Scientists call such organisms
      members of the same biological species.

      Species and the Ability to Reproduce
      A species is a group of individual organisms that interbreed and produce fertile, viable offspring. According to this
      definition, one species is distinguished from another when, in nature, it is not possible for matings between
      individuals from each species to produce fertile offspring.

      Members of the same species share both external and internal characteristics, which develop from their DNA. The
      closer relationship two organisms share, the more DNA they have in common, just like people and their families.
      People’s DNA is likely to be more like their father or mother’s DNA than their cousin or grandparent’s DNA.
      Organisms of the same species have the highest level of DNA alignment and therefore share characteristics and
      behaviors that lead to successful reproduction.

      Species’ appearance can be misleading in suggesting an ability or inability to mate. For example, even though
      domestic dogs (Canis lupus familiaris) display phenotypic differences, such as size, build, and coat, most dogs can
      interbreed and produce viable puppies that can mature and sexually reproduce (Figure 18.9).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          18.2 • Formation of New Species     481




FIGURE 18.9 The (a) poodle and (b) cocker spaniel can reproduce to produce a breed known as (c) the cockapoo. (credit a: modification of
work by Sally Eller, Tom Reese; credit b: modification of work by Jeremy McWilliams; credit c: modification of work by Kathleen Conklin)

In other cases, individuals may appear similar although they are not members of the same species. For example,
even though bald eagles (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) and African fish eagles (Haliaeetus vocifer) are both birds and
eagles, each belongs to a separate species group (Figure 18.10). If humans were to artificially intervene and fertilize
a bald eagle's egg with an African fish eagle's sperm and a chick did hatch, that offspring, called a hybrid (a cross
between two species), would probably be infertile—unable to successfully reproduce after it reached maturity.
Different species may have different genes that are active in development; therefore, it may not be possible to
develop a viable offspring with two different sets of directions. Thus, even though hybridization may take place, the
two species still remain separate.




FIGURE 18.10 The (a) African fish eagle is similar in appearance to the (b) bald eagle, but the two birds are members of different species.
(credit a: modification of work by Nigel Wedge; credit b: modification of work by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)

Populations of species share a gene pool: a collection of all the gene variants in the species. Again, the basis to any
changes in a group or population of organisms must be genetic for this is the only way to share and pass on traits.
When variations occur within a species, they can only pass to the next generation along two main pathways: asexual
reproduction or sexual reproduction. The change will pass on asexually simply if the reproducing cell possesses the
changed trait. For the changed trait to pass on by sexual reproduction, a gamete, such as a sperm or egg cell, must
possess the changed trait. In other words, sexually-reproducing organisms can experience several genetic changes
in their body cells, but if these changes do not occur in a sperm or egg cell, the changed trait will never reach the
next generation. Only heritable traits can evolve. Therefore, reproduction plays a paramount role for genetic change
to take root in a population or species. In short, organisms must be able to reproduce with each other to pass new
traits to offspring.

Speciation
The biological definition of species, which works for sexually reproducing organisms, is a group of actual or potential
interbreeding individuals. There are exceptions to this rule. Many species are similar enough that hybrid offspring
are possible and may often occur in nature, but for the majority of species this rule generally holds. The presence in
nature of hybrids between similar species suggests that they may have descended from a single interbreeding
species, and the speciation process may not yet be completed.

Given the extraordinary diversity of life on the planet there must be mechanisms for speciation: the formation of
two species from one original species. Darwin envisioned this process as a branching event and diagrammed the
process in the only illustration in On the Origin of Species (Figure 18.11a). Compare this illustration to the diagram
482   18 • Evolution and the Origin of Species



      of elephant evolution (Figure 18.11b), which shows that as one species changes over time, it branches to form more
      than one new species, repeatedly, as long as the population survives or until the organism becomes extinct.




      FIGURE 18.11 The only illustration in Darwin's On the Origin of Species is (a) a diagram showing speciation events leading to biological
      diversity. The diagram shows similarities to phylogenetic charts that today illustrate the relationships of species. (b) Modern elephants
      evolved from the Palaeomastodon, a species that lived in Egypt 35–50 million years ago.

      For speciation to occur, two new populations must form from one original population and they must evolve in such a
      way that it becomes impossible for individuals from the two new populations to interbreed. Biologists have
      proposed mechanisms by which this could occur that fall into two broad categories. Allopatric speciation (allo- =
      "other"; -patric = "homeland") involves geographic separation of populations from a parent species and subsequent
      evolution. Sympatric speciation (sym- = "same"; -patric = "homeland") involves speciation occurring within a
      parent species remaining in one location.

      Biologists think of speciation events as the splitting of one ancestral species into two descendant species. There is
      no reason why more than two species might not form at one time except that it is less likely and we can
      conceptualize multiple events as single splits occurring close in time.

      Allopatric Speciation
      A geographically continuous population has a gene pool that is relatively homogeneous. Gene flow, the movement of
      alleles across a species' range, is relatively free because individuals can move and then mate with individuals in
      their new location. Thus, an allele's frequency at one end of a distribution will be similar to the allele's frequency at
      the other end. When populations become geographically discontinuous, it prevents alleles' free-flow. When that
      separation lasts for a period of time, the two populations are able to evolve along different trajectories. Thus, their
      allele frequencies at numerous genetic loci gradually become increasingly different as new alleles independently
      arise by mutation in each population. Typically, environmental conditions, such as climate, resources, predators, and
      competitors for the two populations will differ causing natural selection to favor divergent adaptations in each
      group.

      Isolation of populations leading to allopatric speciation can occur in a variety of ways: a river forming a new branch,
      erosion creating a new valley, a group of organisms traveling to a new location without the ability to return, or seeds
      floating over the ocean to an island. The nature of the geographic separation necessary to isolate populations
      depends entirely on the organism's biology and its potential for dispersal. If two flying insect populations took up
      residence in separate nearby valleys, chances are, individuals from each population would fly back and forth
      continuing gene flow. However, if a new lake divided two rodent populations continued gene flow would be unlikely;
      therefore, speciation would be more likely.

      Biologists group allopatric processes into two categories: dispersal and vicariance. Dispersal is when a few
      members of a species move to a new geographical area, and vicariance is when a natural situation arises to
      physically divide organisms.

      Scientists have documented numerous cases of allopatric speciation taking place. For example, along the west
      coast of the United States, two separate spotted owl subspecies exist. The northern spotted owl has genetic and



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     18.2 • Formation of New Species      483



phenotypic differences from its close relative: the Mexican spotted owl, which lives in the south (Figure 18.12).




FIGURE 18.12 The northern spotted owl and the Mexican spotted owl inhabit geographically separate locations with different climates and
ecosystems. The owl is an example of allopatric speciation. (credit "northern spotted owl": modification of work by John and Karen
Hollingsworth; credit "Mexican spotted owl": modification of work by Bill Radke)

Additionally, scientists have found that the further the distance between two groups that once were the same
species, the more likely it is that speciation will occur. This seems logical because as the distance increases, the
various environmental factors would likely have less in common than locations in close proximity. Consider the two
owls: in the north, the climate is cooler than in the south. The types of organisms in each ecosystem differ, as do
their behaviors and habits. Also, the hunting habits and prey choices of the southern owls vary from the northern
owls. These variances can lead to evolved differences in the owls, and speciation likely will occur.

Adaptive Radiation
In some cases, a population of one species disperses throughout an area, and each finds a distinct niche or isolated
habitat. Over time, the varied demands of their new lifestyles lead to multiple speciation events originating from a
single species. We call this adaptive radiation because many adaptations evolve from a single point of origin; thus,
causing the species to radiate into several new ones. Island archipelagos like the Hawaiian Islands provide an ideal
context for adaptive radiation events because water surrounds each island which leads to geographical isolation for
many organisms. The Hawaiian honeycreeper illustrates one example of adaptive radiation. From a single species,
the founder species, numerous species have evolved, including the six in Figure 18.13.
484   18 • Evolution and the Origin of Species




      FIGURE 18.13 The honeycreeper birds illustrate adaptive radiation. From one original species of bird, multiple others evolved, each with its
      own distinctive characteristics.

      Notice the differences in the species’ beaks in Figure 18.13. Evolution in response to natural selection based on
      specific food sources in each new habitat led to evolution of a different beak suited to the specific food source. The
      seed-eating bird has a thicker, stronger beak which is suited to break hard nuts. The nectar-eating birds have long
      beaks to dip into flowers to reach the nectar. The insect-eating birds have beaks like swords, appropriate for
      stabbing and impaling insects. Darwin’s finches are another example of adaptive radiation in an archipelago.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      Watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/bird_evolution) to see how scientists use evidence to understand how birds
      evolved.


      Sympatric Speciation
      Can divergence occur if no physical barriers are in place to separate individuals who continue to live and reproduce
      in the same habitat? The answer is yes. We call the process of speciation within the same space sympatric. The
      prefix “sym” means same, so “sympatric” means “same homeland” in contrast to “allopatric” meaning “other
      homeland.” Scientists have proposed and studied many mechanisms.

      One form of sympatric speciation can begin with a serious chromosomal error during cell division. In a normal cell
      division event chromosomes replicate, pair up, and then separate so that each new cell has the same number of
      chromosomes. However, sometimes the pairs separate and the end cell product has extra sets of chromosomes in a
      condition that we call polyploidy (Figure 18.14).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     18.2 • Formation of New Species   485




        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 18.14 Aneuploidy results when the gametes have too many or too few chromosomes due to nondisjunction during meiosis. In this
example, the resulting offspring will have 2n+1 or 2n-1 chromosomes.

Which is most likely to survive, offspring with 2n+1 chromosomes or offspring with 2n-1 chromosomes?


Polyploidy is a condition in which a cell or organism has an extra set, or sets, of chromosomes. Scientists have
identified two main types of polyploidy that can lead to reproductive isolation of an individual in the polyploidy state.
Reproductive isolation is the inability to interbreed. In some cases, a polyploid individual will have two or more
complete sets of chromosomes from its own species in a condition that we call autopolyploidy (Figure 18.15). The
prefix “auto-” means “self,” so the term means multiple chromosomes from one’s own species. Polyploidy results
from an error in meiosis in which all of the chromosomes move into one cell instead of separating.




                           FIGURE 18.15 Autopolyploidy results when mitosis is not followed by cytokinesis.

For example, if a plant species with 2n = 6 produces autopolyploid gametes that are also diploid (2n = 6, when they
should be n = 3), the gametes now have twice as many chromosomes as they should have. These new gametes will
be incompatible with the normal gametes that this plant species produces. However, they could either self-pollinate
or reproduce with other autopolyploid plants with gametes having the same diploid number. In this way, sympatric
speciation can occur quickly by forming offspring with 4n that we call a tetraploid. These individuals would
immediately be able to reproduce only with those of this new kind and not those of the ancestral species.

The other form of polyploidy occurs when individuals of two different species reproduce to form a viable offspring
that we call an allopolyploid. The prefix “allo-” means “other” (recall from allopatric): therefore, an allopolyploid
occurs when gametes from two different species combine. Figure 18.16 illustrates one possible way an
allopolyploid can form. Notice how it takes two generations, or two reproductive acts, before the viable fertile hybrid
results.
486   18 • Evolution and the Origin of Species




      FIGURE 18.16 Alloploidy results when two species mate to produce viable offspring. In this example, a normal gamete from one species
      fuses with a polyploidy gamete from another. Two matings are necessary to produce viable offspring.

      The cultivated forms of wheat, cotton, and tobacco plants are all allopolyploids. Although polyploidy occurs
      occasionally in animals, it takes place most commonly in plants. (Animals with any of the types of chromosomal
      aberrations that we describe here are unlikely to survive and produce normal offspring.) Scientists have discovered
      more than half of all plant species studied relate back to a species evolved through polyploidy. With such a high rate
      of polyploidy in plants, some scientists hypothesize that this mechanism takes place more as an adaptation than as
      an error.

      Reproductive Isolation
      Given enough time, the genetic and phenotypic divergence between populations will affect characters that influence
      reproduction: if individuals of the two populations were brought together, mating would be less likely, but if mating
      occurred, offspring would be nonviable or infertile. Many types of diverging characters may affect the reproductive
      isolation, the ability to interbreed, of the two populations.

      Reproductive isolation can take place in a variety of ways. Scientists organize them into two groups: prezygotic
      barriers and postzygotic barriers. Recall that a zygote is a fertilized egg: the first cell of an organism's development
      that reproduces sexually. Therefore, a prezygotic barrier is a mechanism that blocks reproduction from taking
      place. This includes barriers that prevent fertilization when organisms attempt reproduction. A postzygotic barrier
      occurs after zygote formation. This includes organisms that don’t survive the embryonic stage and those that are
      born sterile.

      Some types of prezygotic barriers prevent reproduction entirely. Many organisms only reproduce at certain times of
      the year, often just annually. Differences in breeding schedules, which we call temporal isolation, can act as a form
      of reproductive isolation. For example, two frog species inhabit the same area, but one reproduces from January to
      March; whereas, the other reproduces from March to May (Figure 18.17).




      FIGURE 18.17 These two related frog species exhibit temporal reproductive isolation. (a) Rana aurora breeds earlier in the year than (b)
      Rana boylii. (credit a: modification of work by Mark R. Jennings, USFWS; credit b: modification of work by Alessandro Catenazzi)

      In some cases, populations of a species move or are moved to a new habitat and take up residence in a place that


      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           18.2 • Formation of New Species       487



no longer overlaps with the same species' other populations. We call this situation habitat isolation. Reproduction
with the parent species ceases, and a new group exists that is now reproductively and genetically independent. For
example, a cricket population that was divided after a flood could no longer interact with each other. Over time,
natural selection forces, mutation, and genetic drift will likely result in the two groups diverging (Figure 18.18).




FIGURE 18.18 Speciation can occur when two populations occupy different habitats. The habitats need not be far apart. The cricket (a)
Gryllus pennsylvanicus prefers sandy soil, and the cricket (b) Gryllus firmus prefers loamy soil. The two species can live in close proximity,
but because of their different soil preferences, they became genetically isolated.

Behavioral isolation occurs when the presence or absence of a specific behavior prevents reproduction. For
example, male fireflies use specific light patterns to attract females. Various firefly species display their lights
differently. If a male of one species tried to attract the female of another, she would not recognize the light pattern
and would not mate with the male.

Other prezygotic barriers work when differences in their gamete cells (eggs and sperm) prevent fertilization from
taking place. We call this a gametic barrier. Similarly, in some cases closely related organisms try to mate, but their
reproductive structures simply do not fit together. For example, damselfly males of different species have differently
shaped reproductive organs. If one species tries to mate with the female of another, their body parts simply do not
fit together. (Figure 18.19).




FIGURE 18.19 The shape of the male reproductive organ varies among male damselfly species, and is only compatible with the female of
that species. Reproductive organ incompatibility keeps the species reproductively isolated.

In plants, certain structures aimed to attract one type of pollinator simultaneously prevent a different pollinator
from accessing the pollen. The tunnel through which an animal must access nectar can vary widely in length and
diameter, which prevents the plant from cross-pollinating with a different species (Figure 18.20).




FIGURE 18.20 Some flowers have evolved to attract certain pollinators. The (a) wide foxglove flower is adapted for pollination by bees,
while the (b) long, tube-shaped trumpet creeper flower is adapted for pollination by hummingbirds.

When fertilization takes place and a zygote forms, postzygotic barriers can prevent reproduction. Hybrid individuals
in many cases cannot form normally in the womb and simply do not survive past the embryonic stages. We call this
488   18 • Evolution and the Origin of Species



      hybrid inviability because the hybrid organisms simply are not viable. In another postzygotic situation,
      reproduction leads to hybrid birth and growth that is sterile. Therefore, the organisms are unable to reproduce
      offspring of their own. We call this hybrid sterility.

      Habitat Influence on Speciation
      Sympatric speciation may also take place in ways other than polyploidy. For example, consider a fish species that
      lives in a lake. As the population grows, competition for food increases. Under pressure to find food, suppose that a
      group of these fish had the genetic flexibility to discover and feed off another resource that other fish did not use.
      What if this new food source was located at a different depth of the lake? Over time, those feeding on the second
      food source would interact more with each other than the other fish; therefore, they would breed together as well.
      Offspring of these fish would likely behave as their parents: feeding and living in the same area and keeping
      separate from the original population. If this group of fish continued to remain separate from the first population,
      eventually sympatric speciation might occur as more genetic differences accumulated between them.

      This scenario does play out in nature, as do others that lead to reproductive isolation. One such place is Lake
      Victoria in Africa, famous for its sympatric speciation of cichlid fish. Researchers have found hundreds of sympatric
      speciation events in these fish, which have not only happened in great number, but also over a short period of time.
      Figure 18.21 shows this type of speciation among a cichlid fish population in Nicaragua. In this locale, two types of
      cichlids live in the same geographic location but have come to have different morphologies that allow them to eat
      various food sources.




      FIGURE 18.21 Cichlid fish from Lake Apoyeque, Nicaragua, show evidence of sympatric speciation. Lake Apoyeque, a crater lake, is 1800
      years old, but genetic evidence indicates that a single population of cichlid fish populated the lake only 100 years ago. Nevertheless, two
      populations with distinct morphologies and diets now exist in the lake, and scientists believe these populations may be in an early stage of
      speciation.

      18.3 Reconnection and Speciation Rates
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe pathways of species evolution in hybrid zones
         • Explain the two major theories on rates of speciation

      Speciation occurs over a span of evolutionary time, so when a new species arises, there is a transition period during
      which the closely related species continue to interact.

      Reconnection
      After speciation, two species may recombine or even continue interacting indefinitely. Individual organisms will
      mate with any nearby individual with whom they are capable of breeding. We call an area where two closely related
      species continue to interact and reproduce, forming hybrids a hybrid zone. Over time, the hybrid zone may change
      depending on the fitness of the hybrids and the reproductive barriers (Figure 18.22). If the hybrids are less fit than
      the parents, speciation reinforcement occurs, and the species continue to diverge until they can no longer mate and
      produce viable offspring. If reproductive barriers weaken, fusion occurs and the two species become one. Barriers
      remain the same if hybrids are fit and reproductive: stability may occur and hybridization continues.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                18.3 • Reconnection and Speciation Rates     489




        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 18.22 After speciation has occurred, the two separate but closely related species may continue to produce offspring in an area
called the hybrid zone. Reinforcement, fusion, or stability may result, depending on reproductive barriers and the relative fitness of the
hybrids.

If two species eat a different diet but one of the food sources is eliminated and both species are forced to eat the
same foods, what change in the hybrid zone is most likely to occur?


Hybrids can be either less fit than the parents, more fit, or about the same. Usually hybrids tend to be less fit;
therefore, such reproduction diminishes over time, nudging the two species to diverge further in a process we call
reinforcement. Scientists use this term because the hybrids' low success reinforces the original speciation. If the
hybrids are as fit or more fit than the parents, the two species may fuse back into one species (Figure 18.23).
Scientists have also observed that sometimes two species will remain separate but also continue to interact to
produce some individuals. Scientists classify this as stability because no real net change is taking place.

Varying Rates of Speciation
Scientists around the world study speciation, documenting observations both of living organisms and those found in
the fossil record. As their ideas take shape and as research reveals new details about how life evolves, they develop
models to help explain speciation rates. In terms of how quickly speciation occurs, we can observe two current
patterns: gradual speciation model and punctuated equilibrium model.

In the gradual speciation model, species diverge gradually over time in small steps. In the punctuated equilibrium
model, a new species undergoes changes quickly from the parent species, and then remains largely unchanged for
long periods of time afterward (Figure 18.23). We call this early change model punctuated equilibrium, because it
begins with a punctuated or periodic change and then remains in balance afterward. While punctuated equilibrium
suggests a faster tempo, it does not necessarily exclude gradualism.
490   18 • Evolution and the Origin of Species




              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 18.23 In (a) gradual speciation, species diverge at a slow, steady pace as traits change incrementally. In (b) punctuated
      equilibrium, species diverge quickly and then remain unchanged for long periods of time.

      Which of the following statements is false?

        a. Punctuated equilibrium is most likely to occur in a small population that experiences a rapid change in its
           environment.
        b. Punctuated equilibrium is most likely to occur in a large population that lives in a stable climate.
        c. Gradual speciation is most likely to occur in species that live in a stable climate.
        d. Gradual speciation and punctuated equilibrium both result in the divergence of species.

      The primary influencing factor on changes in speciation rate is environmental conditions. Under some conditions,
      selection occurs quickly or radically. Consider a species of snails that had been living with the same basic form for
      many thousands of years. Layers of their fossils would appear similar for a long time. When a change in the
      environment takes place—such as a drop in the water level—a small number of organisms are separated from the
      rest in a brief period of time, essentially forming one large and one tiny population. The tiny population faces new
      environmental conditions. Because its gene pool quickly became so small, any variation that surfaces and that aids
      in surviving the new conditions becomes the predominant form.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      Visit this website (https://openstax.org/l/snails) to continue the speciation story of the snails.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 18 • Key Terms   491




Key Terms
adaptation heritable trait or behavior in an organism           of the same species
   that aids in its survival and reproduction in its         hybrid zone area where two closely related species
   present environment                                          continue to interact and reproduce, forming hybrids
adaptive radiation speciation when one species               natural selection reproduction of individuals with
   radiates to form several other species                       favorable genetic traits that survive environmental
allopatric speciation speciation that occurs via                change because of those traits, leading to
   geographic separation                                        evolutionary change
allopolyploid polyploidy formed between two                  postzygotic barrier reproductive isolation
   related, but separate species                                mechanism that occurs after zygote formation
aneuploidy condition of a cell having an extra               prezygotic barrier reproductive isolation mechanism
   chromosome or missing a chromosome for its                   that occurs before zygote formation
   species                                                   punctuated equilibrium model for rapid speciation
autopolyploid polyploidy formed within a single                 that can occur when an event causes a small portion
   species                                                      of a population to be cut off from the rest of the
behavioral isolation type of reproductive isolation             population
   that occurs when a specific behavior or lack of one       reinforcement continued speciation divergence
   prevents reproduction from taking place                      between two related species due to low fitness of
convergent evolution process by which groups of                 hybrids between them
   organisms independently evolve to similar forms           reproductive isolation situation that occurs when a
dispersal allopatric speciation that occurs when a              species is reproductively independent from other
   few members of a species move to a new                       species; behavior, location, or reproductive barriers
   geographical area                                            may cause this to happen
divergent evolution process by which groups of               speciation formation of a new species
   organisms evolve in diverse directions from a             species group of populations that interbreed and
   common point                                                 produce fertile offspring
gametic barrier prezygotic barrier occurring when            sympatric speciation speciation that occurs in the
   closely related individuals of different species mate,       same geographic space
   but differences in their gamete cells (eggs and           temporal isolation differences in breeding schedules
   sperm) prevent fertilization from taking place               that can act as a form of prezygotic barrier leading
gradual speciation model model that shows how                   to reproductive isolation
   species diverge gradually over time in small steps        variation genetic differences among individuals in a
habitat isolation reproductive isolation resulting              population
   when species' populations move or are moved to a          vestigial structure physical structure present in an
   new habitat, taking up residence in a place that no          organism but that has no apparent function and
   longer overlaps with the same species' other                 appears to be from a functional structure in a
   populations                                                  distant ancestor
homologous structures parallel structures in diverse         vicariance allopatric speciation that occurs when
   organisms that have a common ancestor                        something in the environment separates organisms
hybrid offspring of two closely related individuals, not        of the same species into separate groups

Chapter Summary
18.1 Understanding Evolution                                 conditions better than others. These organisms pass
                                                             their favorable traits to their offspring. Eventually,
Evolution is the process of adaptation through
                                                             environments change, and what was once a desirable,
mutation, natural selection, and genetic drift which
                                                             advantageous trait may become an undesirable trait
allows more desirable characteristics to pass to the
                                                             and organisms may further evolve. Evolution may be
next generation. Over time, populations evolve more
                                                             convergent with similar traits evolving in multiple
characteristics that are beneficial to their survival. For
                                                             species or divergent with diverse traits evolving in
living organisms to adapt and change to environmental
                                                             multiple species that came from a common ancestor.
pressures, genetic variation must be present. With
                                                             We can observe evidence of evolution by means of DNA
genetic variation, individuals have differences in form
                                                             code and the fossil record, and also by the existence of
and function that allow some to survive certain
                                                             homologous and vestigial structures.
492   18 • Visual Connection Questions



18.2 Formation of New Species                             within a single species; whereas, allopolyploidy occurs
                                                          between closely related species.
Speciation occurs along two main pathways:
geographic separation (allopatric speciation) and         18.3 Reconnection and Speciation Rates
through mechanisms that occur within a shared habitat
                                                          Speciation is not a precise division: overlap between
(sympatric speciation). Both pathways isolate a
                                                          closely related species can occur in areas called hybrid
population reproductively in some form. Mechanisms
                                                          zones. Organisms reproduce with other similar
of reproductive isolation act as barriers between
                                                          organisms. The fitness of these hybrid offspring can
closely related species, enabling them to diverge and
                                                          affect the two species' evolutionary path. Scientists
exist as genetically independent species. Prezygotic
                                                          propose two models for the rate of speciation: one
barriers block reproduction prior to formation of a
                                                          model illustrates how a species can change slowly over
zygote; whereas, postzygotic barriers block
                                                          time. The other model demonstrates how change can
reproduction after fertilization occurs. For a new
                                                          occur quickly from a parent generation to a new
species to develop, something must introduce a
                                                          species. Both models continue to follow natural
reproductive barrier. Sympatric speciation can occur
                                                          selection patterns.
through errors in meiosis that form gametes with extra
chromosomes (polyploidy). Autopolyploidy occurs

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 18.14 Which is most likely to survive,                  occur in a small population that
      offspring with 2n+1 chromosomes or offspring                   experiences a rapid change in its
      with 2n-1 chromosomes?                                         environment.
                                                                  b. Punctuated equilibrium is most likely to
   2. Figure 18.22 If two species eat a different diet
                                                                     occur in a large population that lives in a
      but one of the food sources is eliminated and
                                                                     stable climate.
      both species are forced to eat the same foods,
                                                                  c. Gradual speciation is most likely to occur
      what change in the hybrid zone is most likely to
                                                                     in species that live in a stable climate.
      occur?
                                                                  d. Gradual speciation and punctuated
   3. Figure 18.23 Which of the following statements                 equilibrium both result in the evolution of
      is false?                                                      new species.
         a. Punctuated equilibrium is most likely to


Review Questions
   4. Which scientific concept did Charles Darwin and             a.   A certain duck has a blue beak.
      Alfred Wallace independently discover?                      b.   A mutation occurred to a flower.
        a. mutation                                               c.   Most cheetahs live solitary lives.
        b. natural selection                                      d.   both a and c
        c. overbreeding
        d. sexual reproduction                               7. Which situation is most likely an example of
                                                                convergent evolution?
   5. Which of the following situations will lead to              a. Squid and humans have eyes similar in
      natural selection?                                             structure.
        a. The seeds of two plants land near each                 b. Worms and snakes both move without
            other and one grows larger than the other.               legs.
        b. Two types of fish eat the same kind of                 c. Some bats and birds have wings that allow
            food, and one is better able to gather food              them to fly.
            than the other.                                       d. all of the above
        c. Male lions compete for the right to mate
            with females, with only one possible             8. Which situation would most likely lead to
            winner.                                             allopatric speciation?
        d. all of the above                                        a. Flood causes the formation of a new lake.
                                                                   b. A storm causes several large trees to fall
   6. Which description is an example of a phenotype?                 down.



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           18 • Critical Thinking Questions   493



       c. A mutation causes a new trait to develop.              reproduce
       d. An injury causes an organism to seek out a          d. when offspring of the same parents
          new food source.                                       reproduce

  9. What is the main difference between dispersal      13. Which condition is the basis for a species to be
     and vicariance?                                        reproductively isolated from other members?
       a. One leads to allopatric speciation,                 a. It does not share its habitat with related
           whereas the other leads to sympatric                  species.
           speciation.                                        b. It does not exist out of a single habitat.
       b. One involves the movement of the                    c. It does not exchange genetic information
           organism, and the other involves a change             with other species.
           in the environment.                                d. It does not undergo evolutionary changes
       c. One depends on a genetic mutation                      for a significant period of time.
           occurring, and the other does not.
       d. One involves closely related organisms,       14. Which situation is not an example of a prezygotic
           and the other involves only individuals of       barrier?
           the same species.                                  a. Two species of turtles breed at different
                                                                  times of the year.
 10. Which variable increases the likelihood of               b. Two species of flowers attract different
     allopatric speciation taking place more quickly?             pollinators.
        a. lower rate of mutation                             c. Two species of birds display different
        b. longer distance between divided groups                 mating dances.
        c. increased instances of hybrid formation            d. Two species of insects produce infertile
       d. equivalent numbers of individuals in each               offspring.
           population
                                                        15. Which term is used to describe the continued
 11. What is the main difference between                    divergence of species based on the low fitness
     autopolyploid and allopolyploid?                       of hybrid offspring?
       a. the number of chromosomes                           a. reinforcement
       b. the functionality of the chromosomes                b. fusion
       c. the source of the extra chromosomes                  c. stability
       d. the number of mutations in the extra                d. punctuated equilibrium
          chromosomes
                                                        16. Which components of speciation would be least
 12. Which reproductive combination produces                likely to be a part of punctuated equilibrium?
     hybrids?                                                  a. a division of populations
       a. when individuals of the same species in              b. a change in environmental conditions
           different geographical areas reproduce              c. ongoing gene flow among all individuals
       b. when any two individuals sharing the same            d. a large number of mutations taking place
           habitat reproduce                                       at once
       c. when members of closely related species


Critical Thinking Questions
 17. If a person scatters a handful of garden pea           more evolved than a mouse is incorrect.
     plant seeds in one area, how would natural
                                                        21. Why do island chains provide ideal conditions for
     selection work in this situation?
                                                            adaptive radiation to occur?
 18. Why do scientists consider vestigial structures
                                                        22. Two species of fish had recently undergone
     evidence for evolution?
                                                            sympatric speciation. The males of each species
 19. How does the scientific meaning of “theory”            had a different coloring through which the
     differ from the common vernacular meaning?             females could identify and choose a partner
                                                            from her own species. After some time, pollution
 20. Explain why the statement that a monkey is
                                                            made the lake so cloudy that it was hard for
494   18 • Critical Thinking Questions



       females to distinguish colors. What might take   24. What do both rate of speciation models have in
       place in this situation?                             common?

  23. Why can polyploidy individuals lead to            25. Describe a situation where hybrid reproduction
      speciation fairly quickly?                            would cause two species to fuse into one.




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 19
The Evolution of Populations




FIGURE 19.1 Living things may be single-celled or complex, multicellular organisms. They may be plants, animals,
fungi, bacteria, or archaea. This diversity results from evolution. (credit "wolf": modification of work by Gary Kramer;
credit "coral": modification of work by William Harrigan, NOAA; credit "river": modification of work by Vojtěch Dostál;
credit "fish" modification of work by Christian Mehlführer; credit "mushroom": modification of work by Cory Zanker;
credit "tree": modification of work by Joseph Kranak; credit "bee": modification of work by Cory Zanker)


CHAPTER OUTLINE
19.1 Population Evolution
19.2 Population Genetics
19.3 Adaptive Evolution


INTRODUCTION All life on Earth is related. Evolutionary theory states that humans, beetles,
plants, and bacteria all share a common ancestor, but that millions of years of evolution have
shaped each of these organisms into the forms we see today. Scientists consider evolution a key
concept to understanding life. Natural selection acts to promote traits and behaviors that increase
an organism’s chances of survival and reproduction, while eliminating those traits and behaviors
that are detrimental to the organism. However, natural selection can only, as its name implies,
select—it cannot create. We can attribute novel traits and behaviors to another evolutionary
force—mutation. Mutation and other sources of variation among individuals, as well as the
evolutionary forces that act upon them, alter populations and species. This combination of
processes has led to the world of life we see today.

19.1 Population Evolution
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Define population genetics and describe how scientists use population genetics in studying
      population evolution
   • Define the Hardy-Weinberg principle and discuss its importance

People did not understand the mechanisms of inheritance, or genetics, at the time Charles Darwin
and Alfred Russel Wallace were developing their idea of natural selection. This lack of knowledge
496   19 • The Evolution of Populations



      was a stumbling block to understanding many aspects of evolution. The predominant (and
      incorrect) genetic theory of the time, blending inheritance, made it difficult to understand how
      natural selection might operate. Darwin and Wallace were unaware of the Austrian monk Gregor
      Mendel's 1866 publication "Experiments in Plant Hybridization", which came out not long after
      Darwin's book, On the Origin of Species. Scholars rediscovered Mendel’s work in the early
      twentieth century at which time geneticists were rapidly coming to an understanding of the basics
      of inheritance. Initially, the newly discovered particulate nature of genes made it difficult for
      biologists to understand how gradual evolution could occur. However, over the next few decades
      scientists integrated genetics and evolution in what became known as the modern synthesis—the
      coherent understanding of the relationship between natural selection and genetics that took
      shape by the 1940s. Generally, this concept is accepted today. In short, the modern synthesis
      describes how evolutionary processes, such as natural selection, can affect a population’s genetic
      makeup, and, in turn, how this can result in the gradual evolution of populations and species. The
      theory also connects population change over time (microevolution), with the processes that gave
      rise to new species and higher taxonomic groups with widely divergent characters
      (macroevolution).


        EVERYDAY CONNECTION
        Evolution and Flu Vaccines
        Every fall, the media starts reporting on flu vaccinations and potential outbreaks. Scientists,
        health experts, and institutions determine recommendations for different parts of the
        population, predict optimal production and inoculation schedules, create vaccines, and set up
        clinics to provide inoculations. You may think of the annual flu shot as media hype, an
        important health protection, or just a briefly uncomfortable prick in your arm. However, do you
        think of it in terms of evolution?

        The media hype of annual flu shots is scientifically grounded in our understanding of evolution.
        Each year, scientists across the globe strive to predict the flu strains that they anticipate as
        most widespread and harmful in the coming year. They base this knowledge on how flu strains
        have evolved over time and over the past few flu seasons. Scientists then work to create the
        most effective vaccine to combat those selected strains. Pharmaceutical companies produce
        hundreds of millions of doses in a short period in order to provide vaccinations to key
        populations at the optimal time.

        Because viruses, like the flu, evolve very quickly (especially in evolutionary time), this poses
        quite a challenge. Viruses mutate and replicate at a fast rate, so the vaccine developed to
        protect against last year’s flu strain may not provide the protection one needs against the
        coming year’s strain. Evolution of these viruses means continued adaptations to ensure
        survival, including adaptations to survive previous vaccines.


      Population Genetics
      Recall that a gene for a particular character may have several alleles, or variants, that code for
      different traits associated with that character. For example, in the ABO blood type system in
      humans, three alleles determine the particular blood-type carbohydrate on the surface of red
      blood cells. Each individual in a population of diploid organisms can only carry two alleles for a
      particular gene, but more than two may be present in the individuals that comprise the population.
      Mendel followed alleles as they were inherited from parent to offspring. In the early twentieth
      century, biologists in the area of population genetics began to study how selective forces change
      a population through changes in allele and genotypic frequencies.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          19.1 • Population Evolution   497



The allele frequency (or gene frequency) is the rate at which a specific allele appears within a population. Until now
we have discussed evolution as a change in the characteristics of a population of organisms, but behind that
phenotypic change is genetic change. In population genetics, scientists define the term evolution as a change in the
allele's frequency in a population. Using the ABO blood type system as an example, the frequency of one of the
alleles, IA, is the number of copies of that allele divided by all the copies of the ABO gene in the population. For
                            1
example, a study in Jordan found a frequency of IA to be 26.1 percent. The IB and I0 alleles comprise 13.4 percent
and 60.5 percent of the alleles respectively, and all of the frequencies added up to 100 percent. A change in this
frequency over time would constitute evolution in the population.

The allele frequency within a given population can change depending on environmental factors; therefore, certain
alleles become more widespread than others during the natural selection process. Natural selection can alter the
population’s genetic makeup. An example is if a given allele confers a phenotype that allows an individual to better
survive or have more offspring. Because many of those offspring will also carry the beneficial allele, and often the
corresponding phenotype, they will have more offspring of their own that also carry the allele, thus, perpetuating the
cycle. Over time, the allele will spread throughout the population. Some alleles will quickly become fixed in this way,
meaning that every individual of the population will carry the allele, while detrimental mutations may be swiftly
eliminated if derived from a dominant allele from the gene pool. The gene pool is the sum of all the alleles in a
population.

Sometimes, allele frequencies within a population change randomly with no advantage to the population over
existing allele frequencies. We call this phenomenon genetic drift. Natural selection and genetic drift usually occur
simultaneously in populations and are not isolated events. It is hard to determine which process dominates because
it is often nearly impossible to determine the cause of change in allele frequencies at each occurrence. We call an
event that initiates an allele frequency change in an isolated part of the population, which is not typical of the
original population, the founder effect. Natural selection, random drift, and founder effects can lead to significant
changes in a population's genome.

Hardy-Weinberg Principle of Equilibrium
In the early twentieth century, English mathematician Godfrey Hardy and German physician Wilhelm Weinberg
stated the principle of equilibrium to describe the population's genetic makeup. The theory, which later became
known as the Hardy-Weinberg principle of equilibrium, states that a population’s allele and genotype frequencies
are inherently stable—unless some kind of evolutionary force is acting upon the population, neither the allele nor the
genotypic frequencies would change. The Hardy-Weinberg principle assumes an infinitely large population and
conditions with no mutations, migration, emigration, or selective pressure for or against genotype. While no
population can satisfy those conditions, the principle offers a useful model against which to compare real
population changes.

Working under this theory, population geneticists represent different alleles as different variables in their
mathematical models. The variable p, for example, often represents the frequency of a particular allele, say Y for the
trait of yellow in Mendel’s peas, while the variable q represents the frequency of y alleles that confer the color green.
If these are the only two possible alleles for a given locus in the population, p + q = 1. In other words, all the p
alleles and all the q alleles comprise all of the alleles for that locus in the population.

However, what ultimately interests most biologists is not the frequencies of different alleles, but the frequencies of
the resulting genotypes, known as the population’s genetic structure, from which scientists can surmise phenotype
distribution. If we observe the phenotype, we can know only the homozygous recessive allele's genotype. The
calculations provide an estimate of the remaining genotypes. Since each individual carries two alleles per gene, if we
know the allele frequencies (p and q), predicting the genotypes' frequencies is a simple mathematical calculation to
determine the probability of obtaining these genotypes if we draw two alleles at random from the gene pool. In the
above scenario, an individual pea plant could be pp (YY), and thus produce yellow peas; pq (Yy), also yellow; or qq
(yy), and thus produce green peas (Figure 19.2). In other words, the frequency of pp individuals is simply p2; the
frequency of pq individuals is 2pq; and the frequency of qq individuals is q2. Again, if p and q are the only two
possible alleles for a given trait in the population, these genotypes frequencies will sum to one: p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1.

1 Sahar S. Hanania, Dhia S. Hassawi, and Nidal M. Irshaid, “Allele Frequency and Molecular Genotypes of ABO Blood Group System in a
Jordanian Population,” Journal of Medical Sciences 7 (2007): 51-58, doi:10.3923/jms.2007.51.58.
498   19 • The Evolution of Populations




              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 19.2 When populations are in the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, the allelic frequency is stable from generation to generation and we
      can determine the allele distribution from the Hardy-Weinberg equation. If the allelic frequency measured in the field differs from the
      predicted value, scientists can make inferences about what evolutionary forces are at play.

      In plants, violet flower color (V) is dominant over white (v). If p = 0.8 and q = 0.2 in a population of 500 plants, how
      many individuals would you expect to be homozygous dominant (VV), heterozygous (Vv), and homozygous recessive
      (vv)? How many plants would you expect to have violet flowers, and how many would have white flowers?


      In theory, if a population is at equilibrium—that is, there are no evolutionary forces acting upon it—generation after
      generation would have the same gene pool and genetic structure, and these equations would all hold true all of the
      time. Of course, even Hardy and Weinberg recognized that no natural population is immune to evolution.
      Populations in nature are constantly changing in genetic makeup due to drift, mutation, possibly migration, and
      selection. As a result, the only way to determine the exact distribution of phenotypes in a population is to go out and
      count them. However, the Hardy-Weinberg principle gives scientists a mathematical baseline of a non-evolving
      population to which they can compare evolving populations and thereby infer what evolutionary forces might be at
      play. If the frequencies of alleles or genotypes deviate from the value expected from the Hardy-Weinberg equation,
      then the population is evolving.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  19.2 • Population Genetics   499




    LINK TO LEARNING
Use this online calculator (https://openstax.org/l/hardy-weinberg) to determine a population's genetic structure.


19.2 Population Genetics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Describe the different types of variation in a population
   • Explain why natural selection can only act upon heritable variation
   • Describe genetic drift and the bottleneck effect
   • Explain how each evolutionary force can influence a population's allele frequencies

A population's individuals often display different phenotypes, or express different alleles of a particular gene, which
scientists refer to as polymorphisms. We call populations with two or more variations of particular characteristics
polymorphic. A number of factors, including the population’s genetic structure and the environment (Figure 19.3)
influence population variation, the distribution of phenotypes among individuals. Understanding phenotypic
variation sources in a population is important for determining how a population will evolve in response to different
evolutionary pressures.




        FIGURE 19.3 The distribution of phenotypes in this litter of kittens illustrates population variation. (credit: Pieter Lanser)

Genetic variability
Natural selection and some of the other evolutionary forces can only act on heritable traits, namely an organism’s
genetic code. Because alleles are passed from parent to offspring, those that confer beneficial traits or behaviors
may be selected, while deleterious alleles may not. Acquired traits, for the most part, are not heritable. For example,
if an athlete works out in the gym every day, building up muscle strength, the athlete’s offspring will not necessarily
grow up to be a body builder. If there is a genetic basis for the ability to run fast, on the other hand, a parent may
pass this to a child.

    LINK TO LEARNING
Before Darwinian evolution became the prevailing theory of the field, French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck
theorized that organisms could inherit acquired traits. While the majority of scientists have not supported this
hypothesis, some have recently begun to realize that Lamarck was not completely wrong. Visit this site
(https://openstax.org/l/epigenetic) to learn more.


Heritability is the fraction of phenotype variation that we can attribute to genetic differences, or genetic variability,
among individuals in a population. The greater the heritability of a population’s phenotypic variation, the more
susceptible it is to the evolutionary forces that act on heritable variation.
500   19 • The Evolution of Populations



      We call the diversity of alleles and genotypes within a population genetic variability. When scientists are involved in
      the breeding of a species, such as with animals in zoos and nature preserves, they try to increase a population’s
      genetic variability to preserve as much of the phenotypic diversity as possible. This also helps reduce associated
      risks of inbreeding, the mating of closely related individuals, which can have the undesirable effect of bringing
      together deleterious recessive mutations that can cause abnormalities and susceptibility to disease. For example, a
      disease that is caused by a rare, recessive allele might exist in a population, but it will only manifest itself when an
      individual carries two copies of the allele. Because the allele is rare in a normal, healthy population with unrestricted
      habitat, the chance that two carriers will mate is low, and even then, only 25 percent of their offspring will inherit the
      disease allele from both parents. While it is likely to happen at some point, it will not happen frequently enough for
      natural selection to be able to swiftly eliminate the allele from the population, and as a result, the allele maintains
      itself at low levels in the gene pool. However, if a family of carriers begins to interbreed with each other, this will
      dramatically increase the likelihood of two carriers mating and eventually producing diseased offspring, a
      phenomenon that scientists call inbreeding depression.

      Changes in allele frequencies that we identify in a population can shed light on how it is evolving. In addition to
      natural selection, there are other evolutionary forces that could be in play: genetic drift, gene flow, mutation,
      nonrandom mating, and environmental variation.

      Genetic Drift
      The theory of natural selection stems from the observation that some individuals in a population are more likely to
      survive longer and have more offspring than others; thus, they will pass on more of their genes to the next
      generation. A big, powerful male gorilla, for example, is much more likely than a smaller, weaker one to become the
      population’s silverback, the pack’s leader who mates far more than the other males of the group. The pack leader
      will father more offspring, who share half of his genes, and are likely to also grow bigger and stronger like their
      father. Over time, the genes for bigger size will increase in frequency in the population, and the population will, as a
      result, grow larger on average. That is, this would occur if this particular selection pressure, or driving selective
      force, were the only one acting on the population. In other examples, better camouflage or a stronger resistance to
      drought might pose a selection pressure.

      Another way a population’s allele and genotype frequencies can change is genetic drift (Figure 19.4), which is
      simply the effect of chance. By chance, some individuals will have more offspring than others—not due to an
      advantage conferred by some genetically-encoded trait, but just because one male happened to be in the right place
      at the right time (when the receptive female walked by) or because the other one happened to be in the wrong place
      at the wrong time (when a fox was hunting).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   19.2 • Population Genetics     501




        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 19.4 Genetic drift in a population can lead to eliminating an allele from a population by chance. In this example, rabbits with the
brown coat color allele (B) are dominant over rabbits with the white coat color allele (b). In the first generation, the two alleles occur with
equal frequency in the population, resulting in p and q values of .5. Only half of the individuals reproduce, resulting in a second generation
with p and q values of .7 and .3, respectively. Only two individuals in the second generation reproduce, and by chance these individuals are
homozygous dominant for brown coat color. As a result, in the third generation the recessive b allele is lost.

Do you think genetic drift would happen more quickly on an island or on the mainland?


Small populations are more susceptible to the forces of genetic drift. Large populations, alternatively, are buffered
against the effects of chance. If one individual of a population of 10 individuals happens to die at a young age before
it leaves any offspring to the next generation, all of its genes—1/10 of the population’s gene pool—will be suddenly
lost. In a population of 100, that’s only 1 percent of the overall gene pool; therefore, it is much less impactful on the
population’s genetic structure.
502   19 • The Evolution of Populations




           LINK TO LEARNING
      Go to this site (https://openstax.org/l/genetic_drift) to watch an animation of random sampling and genetic drift in
      action.


      Natural events, such as an earthquake disaster that kills—at random—a large portion of the population, can magnify
      genetic drift. Known as the bottleneck effect, it results in suddenly wiping out a large portion of the gene pool
      (Figure 19.5). At once, the survivors' genetic structure becomes the entire population's genetic structure, which may
      be very different from the pre-disaster population.




                          FIGURE 19.5 A chance event or catastrophe can reduce the genetic variability within a population.

      Another scenario in which populations might experience a strong influence of genetic drift is if some portion of the
      population leaves to start a new population in a new location or if a physical barrier divides a population. In this
      situation, those individuals are an unlikely representation of the entire population, which results in the founder
      effect. The founder effect occurs when the genetic structure changes to match that of the new population’s founding
      fathers and mothers. Researchers believe that the founder effect was a key factor in the genetic history of the
      Afrikaner population of Dutch settlers in South Africa, as evidenced by mutations that are common in Afrikaners but
      rare in most other populations. This is probably because a higher-than-normal proportion of the founding colonists
      carried these mutations. As a result, the population expresses unusually high incidences of Huntington’s disease
      (HD) and Fanconi anemia (FA), a genetic disorder known to cause blood marrow and congenital abnormalities—even
              2
      cancer.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      Watch this short video to learn more about the founder and bottleneck effects.

      Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/19-2-population-genetics)



              SCIENTIFIC METHOD CONNECTION

      Testing the Bottleneck Effect
      Question: How do natural disasters affect a population's genetic structure?



      2 A. J. Tipping et al., “Molecular and Genealogical Evidence for a Founder Effect in Fanconi Anemia Families of the Afrikaner Population of
      South Africa,” PNAS 98, no. 10 (2001): 5734-5739, doi: 10.1073/pnas.091402398.



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         19.2 • Population Genetics   503



Background: When an earthquake or hurricane suddenly wipes out much of a population, the surviving individuals
are usually a random sampling of the original group. As a result, the population's genetic makeup can change
dramatically. We call this phenomenon the bottleneck effect.

Hypothesis: Repeated natural disasters will yield different population genetic structures; therefore, each time one
runs this experiment the results will vary.

Test the hypothesis: Count out the original population using different colored beads. For example, red, blue, and
yellow beads might represent red, blue, and yellow individuals. After recording the number of each individual in the
original population, place them all in a bottle with a narrow neck that will only allow a few beads out at a time. Then,
pour 1/3 of the bottle’s contents into a bowl. This represents the surviving individuals after a natural disaster kills a
majority of the population. Count the number of the different colored beads in the bowl, and record it. Then, place
all of the beads back in the bottle and repeat the experiment four more times.

Analyze the data: Compare the five populations that resulted from the experiment. Do the populations all contain
the same number of different colored beads, or do they vary? Remember, these populations all came from the same
exact parent population.

Form a conclusion: Most likely, the five resulting populations will differ quite dramatically. This is because natural
disasters are not selective—they kill and spare individuals at random. Now think about how this might affect a real
population. What happens when a hurricane hits the Mississippi Gulf Coast? How do the seabirds that live on the
beach fare?


Gene Flow
Another important evolutionary force is gene flow: the flow of alleles in and out of a population due to the migration
of individuals or gametes (Figure 19.6). While some populations are fairly stable, others experience more flux. Many
plants, for example, send their pollen far and wide, by wind or by bird, to pollinate other populations of the same
species some distance away. Even a population that may initially appear to be stable, such as a pride of lions, can
experience its fair share of immigration and emigration as developing males leave their mothers to seek out a new
pride with genetically unrelated females. This variable flow of individuals in and out of the group not only changes
the population's gene structure, but it can also introduce new genetic variation to populations in different geological
locations and habitats.




                FIGURE 19.6 Gene flow can occur when an individual travels from one geographic location to another.

Mutation
Mutations are changes to an organism’s DNA and are an important driver of diversity in populations. Species evolve
because of mutations accumulating over time. The appearance of new mutations is the most common way to
introduce novel genotypic and phenotypic variability. Some mutations are unfavorable or harmful and are quickly
eliminated from the population by natural selection. Others are beneficial and will spread through the population.
Whether or not a mutation is beneficial or harmful is determined by whether it helps an organism survive to sexual
maturity and reproduce. Some mutations do not do anything and can linger, unaffected by natural selection, in the
genome. Some can have a dramatic effect on a gene and the resulting phenotype.
504   19 • The Evolution of Populations



      Nonrandom Mating
      If individuals nonrandomly mate with their peers, the result can be a changing population. There are many reasons
      nonrandom mating occurs. One reason is simple mate choice. For example, female peahens may prefer peacocks
      with bigger, brighter tails. Natural selection picks traits that lead to more mating selections for an individual. One
      common form of mate choice, called assortative mating, is an individual’s preference to mate with partners who are
      phenotypically similar to themselves.

      Another cause of nonrandom mating is physical location. This is especially true in large populations spread over vast
      geographic distances where not all individuals will have equal access to one another. Some might be miles apart
      through woods or over rough terrain, while others might live immediately nearby.

      Environmental Variation
      Genes are not the only players involved in determining population variation. Other factors, such as the environment
      (Figure 19.7) also influence phenotypes. A beachgoer is likely to have darker skin than a city dweller, for example,
      due to regular exposure to the sun, an environmental factor. For some species, the environment determines some
      major characteristics, such as sex. For example, some turtles and other reptiles have temperature-dependent sex
      determination (TSD). TSD means that individuals develop into males if their eggs are incubated within a certain
      temperature range, or females at a different temperature range. Because these phenotypic differences are due to
      environmental variation instead of genetic differences, they cannot be inherited and do not lead to evolution.
      However, environmental variation can affect evolution through natural selection favoring different alleles and
      shaping different phenotypes in different environments.




      FIGURE 19.7 The temperature at which the eggs are incubated determine the American alligator's (Alligator mississippiensis) sex. Eggs
      incubated at 30°C produce females, and eggs incubated at 33°C produce males. (credit: Steve Hillebrand, USFWS)

      Geographic separation between populations can lead to differences in the phenotypic variation between those
      populations. We see such geographical variation between most populations and it can be significant. We can
      observe one type of geographic variation, a cline, as given species' populations vary gradually across an ecological
      gradient. Species of warm-blooded animals, for example, tend to have larger bodies in the cooler climates closer to
      the earth’s poles, allowing them to better conserve heat. This is a latitudinal cline. Alternatively, flowering plants
      tend to bloom at different times depending on where they are along a mountain slope. This is an altitudinal cline.

      If there is gene flow between the populations, the individuals will likely show gradual differences in phenotype along
      the cline. Restricted gene flow, alternatively can lead to abrupt differences, even speciation.

      19.3 Adaptive Evolution
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Explain the different ways natural selection can shape populations
         • Describe how these different forces can lead to different outcomes in terms of the population variation

      Natural selection acts on the population’s heritable traits: selecting for beneficial alleles that allow for


      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    19.3 • Adaptive Evolution   505



environmental adaptation, and thus increasing their frequency in the population, while selecting against deleterious
alleles and thereby decreasing their frequency. Scientists call this process adaptive evolution. Natural selection
acts on entire organisms, not on an individual allele within the organism. An individual may carry a very beneficial
genotype with a resulting phenotype that, for example, increases the ability to reproduce (fecundity), but if that
same individual also carries an allele that results in a fatal childhood disease, that fecundity phenotype will not pass
to the next generation because the individual will not live to reach reproductive age. Natural selection acts at the
individual's level. It selects for individuals with greater contributions to the gene pool of the next generation.
Scientists call this an organism’s evolutionary (Darwinian) fitness.

Fitness is often quantifiable and is measured by scientists in the field. However, it is not an individual's absolute
fitness that counts, but rather how it compares to the other organisms in the population. Scientists call this concept
relative fitness, which allows researchers to determine which individuals are contributing additional offspring to the
next generation, and thus, how the population might evolve.

There are several ways selection can affect population variation: stabilizing selection, directional selection,
diversifying selection, frequency-dependent selection, and sexual selection. As natural selection influences the
allele frequencies in a population, individuals can either become more or less genetically similar and the
phenotypes can become more similar or more disparate.

Stabilizing Selection
If natural selection favors an average phenotype, selecting against extreme variation, the population will undergo
stabilizing selection (Figure 19.8). In a mouse population that live in the woods, for example, natural selection is
likely to favor mice that best blend in with the forest floor and are less likely for predators to spot. Assuming the
ground is a fairly consistent shade of brown, those mice whose fur is most closely matched to that color will be most
likely to survive and reproduce, passing on their genes for their brown coat. Mice that carry alleles that make them a
bit lighter or a bit darker will stand out against the ground and be more likely to fall victim to predation. As a result of
this selection, the population’s genetic variability will decrease.

Directional Selection
When the environment changes, populations will often undergo directional selection (Figure 19.8), which selects
for phenotypes at one end of the spectrum of existing variation. A classic example of this type of selection is the
evolution of the peppered moth in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century England. Prior to the Industrial Revolution,
the moths were predominately light in color, which allowed them to blend in with the light-colored trees and lichens
in their environment. However, as soot began spewing from factories, the trees darkened, and the light-colored
moths became easier for predatory birds to spot. Over time, the frequency of the moth's melanic form increased
because they had a higher survival rate in habitats affected by air pollution because their darker coloration blended
with the sooty trees. Similarly, the hypothetical mouse population may evolve to take on a different coloration if
something were to cause the forest floor where they live to change color. The result of this type of selection is a shift
in the population’s genetic variability toward the new, fit phenotype.

    LINK TO LEARNING
In science, we sometimes believe some things are true, and then new information becomes available that changes
our understanding. The peppered moth story is an example: some scientists recently have questioned the facts
behind the selection toward darker moths. Read this article (https://openstax.org/l/peppered_moths) to learn more.


Diversifying Selection
Sometimes two or more distinct phenotypes can each have their advantages for natural selection, while the
intermediate phenotypes are, on average, less fit. Scientists call this diversifying selection (Figure 19.8) We see
this in many animal populations that have multiple male forms. Large, dominant alpha males use brute force to
obtain mates, while small males can sneak in for furtive copulations with the females in an alpha male’s territory. In
this case, both the alpha males and the “sneaking” males will be selected for, but medium-sized males, who can’t
overtake the alpha males and are too big to sneak copulations, are selected against. Diversifying selection can also
506   19 • The Evolution of Populations



      occur when environmental changes favor individuals on either end of the phenotypic spectrum. Imagine a mouse
      population living at the beach where there is light-colored sand interspersed with patches of tall grass. In this
      scenario, light-colored mice that blend in with the sand would be favored, as well as dark-colored mice that can hide
      in the grass. Medium-colored mice, alternatively would not blend in with either the grass or the sand, and thus
      predators would most likely eat them. The result of this type of selection is increased genetic variability as the
      population becomes more diverse.



              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 19.8 Different types of natural selection can impact the distribution of phenotypes within a population. In (a) stabilizing selection,
      an average phenotype is favored. In (b) directional selection, a change in the environment shifts the spectrum of observed phenotypes. In
      (c) diversifying selection, two or more extreme phenotypes are selected for, while the average phenotype is selected against.

      In recent years, factories have become cleaner, and release less soot into the environment. What impact do you
      think this has had on the distribution of moth color in the population?


      Frequency-Dependent Selection
      Another type of selection, frequency-dependent selection, favors phenotypes that are either common (positive
      frequency-dependent selection) or rare (negative frequency-dependent selection). We can observe an interesting
      example of this type of selection in a unique group of Pacific Northwest lizards. Male common side-blotched lizards
      come in three throat-color patterns: orange, blue, and yellow. Each of these forms has a different reproductive
      strategy: orange males are the strongest and can fight other males for access to their females. Blue males are
      medium-sized and form strong pair bonds with their mates. Yellow males (Figure 19.9) are the smallest, and look a
      bit like females, which allows them to sneak copulations. Like a game of rock-paper-scissors, orange beats blue,
      blue beats yellow, and yellow beats orange in the competition for females. That is, the big, strong orange males can



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              19.3 • Adaptive Evolution   507



fight off the blue males to mate with the blue’s pair-bonded females, the blue males are successful at guarding their
mates against yellow sneaker males, and the yellow males can sneak copulations from the potential mates of the
large, polygynous orange males.




FIGURE 19.9 A yellow-throated side-blotched lizard is smaller than either the blue-throated or orange-throated males and appears a bit
like the females of the species, allowing it to sneak copulations. (credit: “tinyfroglet”/Flickr)

In this scenario, natural selection favors orange males when blue males dominate the population. Blue males will
thrive when the population is mostly yellow males, and yellow males will be selected for when orange males are the
most populous. As a result, populations of side-blotched lizards cycle in the distribution of these phenotypes—in
one generation, orange might predominate, and then yellow males will begin to rise in frequency. Once yellow males
comprise a majority of the population, blue males will be selected. Finally, when blue males become common,
orange males once again will be favored. As indicated above, if the selection is against the common, favoring the
rare, so in the case of the lizard there is negative frequency-dependent selection.

Negative frequency-dependent selection serves to increase the population’s genetic variability by selecting for rare
phenotypes; whereas, positive frequency-dependent selection usually decreases genetic variability by selecting for
common phenotypes.

Sexual Selection
Males and females of certain species are often quite different from one another in ways beyond the reproductive
organs. Males are often larger, for example, and display many elaborate colors and adornments, like the peacock’s
tail, while females tend to be smaller and duller in decoration. We call such differences sexual dimorphisms (Figure
19.10), which arise in many populations, particularly animal populations, where there is more variability in the
male's reproductive success than that of the females. That is, some males—often the bigger, stronger, or more
decorated males—obtain the vast majority of the total matings, while others receive none. This can occur because
the males are better at fighting off other males, or because females will choose to mate with the bigger or more
decorated males. In either case, this variation in reproductive success generates a strong selection pressure among
males to obtain those matings, resulting in the evolution of bigger body size and elaborate ornaments to attract the
females’ attention. Females, however, tend to achieve a handful of selected matings; therefore, they are more likely
to select more desirable males.

Sexual dimorphism varies widely among species, and some species are even sex-role reversed. In such cases,
females tend to have a greater variability in their reproductive success than males and are correspondingly selected
for the bigger body size and elaborate traits usually characteristic of males.
508   19 • The Evolution of Populations




      FIGURE 19.10 Sexual dimorphism in (a) peacocks and peahens, (b) Argiope appensa spiders (the female spider is the large one), and in (c)
      wood ducks. (credit “spiders”: modification of work by “Sanba38”/Wikimedia Commons; credit “duck”: modification of work by Kevin Cole)

      We call the selection pressures on males and females to obtain matings sexual selection. It can result in developing
      secondary sexual characteristics that do not benefit the individual’s likelihood of survival but help to maximize its
      reproductive success. Sexual selection can be so strong that it selects traits that are actually detrimental to the
      individual’s survival. Think, once again, about the peacock’s tail. While it is beautiful and the male with the largest,
      most colorful tail is more likely to win the female, it is not the most practical appendage. In addition to greater
      visibility to predators, it makes the males slower in their attempted escapes. There is some evidence that this risk is
      why females like the big tails in the first place. The speculation is that large tails carry risk, and only the best males
      survive that risk: the bigger the tail, the more fit the male. We call this the handicap principle.

      The good genes hypothesis states that males develop these impressive ornaments to show off their efficient
      metabolism or their ability to fight disease. Females then choose males with the most impressive traits because it
      signals their genetic superiority, which they will then pass on to their offspring. Although one may argue that
      females should not be picky because it will likely reduce their number of offspring, if better males father more fit
      offspring, it may be beneficial. Fewer, healthier offspring may increase the chances of survival more than many,
      weaker offspring.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      In 1915, biologist Ronald Fisher proposed another model of sexual selection: the Fisherian runaway model
      (https://openstax.org/l/sexual_select), which suggests that selection of certain traits is a result of sexual preference.


      In both the handicap principle and the good genes hypothesis, the trait is an honest signal of the males’ quality,
      thus giving females a way to find the fittest mates— males that will pass the best genes to their offspring.

      No Perfect Organism
      Natural selection is a driving force in evolution and can generate populations that are better adapted to survive and
      successfully reproduce in their environments. However, natural selection cannot produce the perfect organism.
      Natural selection can only select on existing variation in the population. It does not create anything from scratch.
      Thus, it is limited by a population’s existing genetic variability and whatever new alleles arise through mutation and
      gene flow.

      Natural selection is also limited because it works at the individual, not allele level, and some alleles are linked due
      to their physical proximity in the genome, making them more likely to pass on together (linkage disequilibrium). Any
      given individual may carry some beneficial and some unfavorable alleles. It is the alleles' net effect, or the
      organism’s fitness, upon which natural selection can act. As a result, good alleles can be lost if individuals who carry
      them also have several overwhelmingly bad alleles. Likewise, bad alleles can be kept if individuals who have enough
      good alleles to result in an overall fitness benefit carry them.

      Furthermore, natural selection can be constrained by the relationships between different polymorphisms. One
      morph may confer a higher fitness than another, but may not increase in frequency because going from the less
      beneficial to the more beneficial trait would require going through a less beneficial phenotype. Think back to the
      mice that live at the beach. Some are light-colored and blend in with the sand, while others are dark and blend in



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                19.3 • Adaptive Evolution   509



with the patches of grass. The dark-colored mice may be, overall, more fit than the light-colored mice, and at first
glance, one might expect the light-colored mice to be selected for a darker coloration. However, remember that the
intermediate phenotype, a medium-colored coat, is very bad for the mice—they cannot blend in with either the sand
or the grass and predators are more likely to eat them. As a result, the light-colored mice would not be selected for a
dark coloration because those individuals who began moving in that direction (began selection for a darker coat)
would be less fit than those that stayed light.

Finally, it is important to understand that not all evolution is adaptive. While natural selection selects the fittest
individuals and often results in a more fit population overall, other forces of evolution, including genetic drift and
gene flow, often do the opposite: introducing deleterious alleles to the population’s gene pool. Evolution has no
purpose—it is not changing a population into a preconceived ideal. It is simply the sum of the various forces that we
have described in this chapter and how they influence the population's genetic and phenotypic variability.
510   19 • Key Terms




Key Terms
adaptive evolution increase in frequency of                 good genes hypothesis theory of sexual selection
   beneficial alleles and decrease in deleterious alleles      that argues individuals develop impressive
   due to selection                                            ornaments to show off their efficient metabolism or
allele frequency (also, gene frequency) rate at which          ability to fight disease
   a specific allele appears within a population            handicap principle theory of sexual selection that
assortative mating when individuals tend to mate               argues only the fittest individuals can afford costly
   with those who are phenotypically similar to                traits
   themselves                                               heritability fraction of population variation that can
bottleneck effect magnification of genetic drift as a          be attributed to its genetic variability
   result of natural events or catastrophes                 honest signal trait that gives a truthful impression of
cline gradual geographic variation across an                   an individual’s fitness
   ecological gradient                                      inbreeding mating of closely related individuals
directional selection selection that favors                 inbreeding depression increase in abnormalities and
   phenotypes at one end of the spectrum of existing           disease in inbreeding populations
   variation                                                macroevolution broader scale evolutionary changes
diversifying selection selection that favors two or            that scientists see over paleontological time
   more distinct phenotypes                                 microevolution changes in a population’s genetic
evolutionary fitness (also, Darwinian fitness)                 structure
   individual’s ability to survive and reproduce            modern synthesis overarching evolutionary paradigm
founder effect event that initiates an allele frequency        that took shape by the 1940s and scientists
   change in part of the population, which is not typical      generally accept today
   of the original population                               nonrandom mating changes in a population’s gene
frequency-dependent selection selection that favors            pool due to mate choice or other forces that cause
   phenotypes that are either common (positive                 individuals to mate with certain phenotypes more
   frequency-dependent selection) or rare (negative            than others
   frequency-dependent selection)                           population genetics study of how selective forces
gene flow flow of alleles in and out of a population           change the allele frequencies in a population over
   due to the individual or gamete migration                   time
gene pool all the alleles that the individuals in the       population variation distribution of phenotypes in a
   population carry                                            population
genetic drift effect of chance on a population’s gene       relative fitness individual’s ability to survive and
   pool                                                        reproduce relative to the rest of the population
genetic structure distribution of the different             selective pressure environmental factor that causes
   possible genotypes in a population                          one phenotype to be better than another
genetic variability diversity of alleles and genotypes      sexual dimorphism phenotypic difference between a
   in a population                                             population's males and females
geographical variation differences in the phenotypic        stabilizing selection selection that favors average
   variation between populations that are separated            phenotypes
   geographically

Chapter Summary
19.1 Population Evolution                                   from generation to generation, scientists can conclude
                                                            that the population is not in Hardy-Weinberg
The modern synthesis of evolutionary theory grew out
                                                            equilibrium, and is thus evolving.
of the cohesion of Darwin’s, Wallace’s, and Mendel’s
thoughts on evolution and heredity, along with the          19.2 Population Genetics
more modern study of population genetics. It
                                                            Both genetic and environmental factors can cause
describes the evolution of populations and species,
                                                            phenotypic variation in a population. Different alleles
from small-scale changes among individuals to large-
                                                            can confer different phenotypes, and different
scale changes over paleontological time periods. To
                                                            environments can also cause individuals to look or act
understand how organisms evolve, scientists can track
                                                            differently. Only those differences encoded in an
populations’ allele frequencies over time. If they differ
                                                            individual’s genes, however, can pass to its offspring


Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 19 • Visual Connection Questions   511



and, thus, be a target of natural selection. Natural        If the fit phenotypes are those that are similar, natural
selection works by selecting for alleles that confer        selection will result in stabilizing selection, and an
beneficial traits or behaviors, while selecting against     overall decrease in the population’s variation.
those for deleterious qualities. Genetic drift stems from   Directional selection works to shift a population’s
the chance occurrence that some individuals in the          variability toward a new, fit phenotype, as
gene line have more offspring than others. When             environmental conditions change. In contrast,
individuals leave or join the population, allele            diversifying selection results in increased genetic
frequencies can change as a result of gene flow.            variability by selecting for two or more distinct
Mutations to an individual’s DNA may introduce new          phenotypes.
variation into a population. Allele frequencies can also
                                                            Other types of selection include frequency-dependent
alter when individuals do not randomly mate with
                                                            selection, in which individuals with either common
others in the group.
                                                            (positive frequency-dependent selection) or rare
19.3 Adaptive Evolution                                     (negative frequency-dependent selection) are
                                                            selected. Finally, sexual selection results from one sex
Because natural selection acts to increase the
                                                            having more variability in the reproductive success
frequency of beneficial alleles and traits while
                                                            than the other. As a result, males and females
decreasing the frequency of deleterious qualities, it is
                                                            experience different selective pressures, which can
adaptive evolution. Natural selection acts at the
                                                            often lead to the evolution of phenotypic differences,
individual level, selecting for those that have a higher
                                                            or sexual dimorphisms, between the two.
overall fitness compared to the rest of the population.

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 19.2 In plants, violet flower color (V) is        2. Figure 19.4 Do you think genetic drift would
      dominant over white (v). If p = .8 and q = 0.2 in a         happen more quickly on an island or on the
      population of 500 plants, how many individuals              mainland?
      would you expect to be homozygous dominant
                                                               3. Figure 19.8 In recent years, factories have
      (VV), heterozygous (Vv), and homozygous
                                                                  become cleaner, and less soot is released into
      recessive (vv)? How many plants would you
                                                                  the environment. What impact do you think this
      expect to have violet flowers, and how many
                                                                  has had on the distribution of moth color in the
      would have white flowers?
                                                                  population?

Review Questions
   4. What is the difference between micro- and                5. Population genetics is the study of:
      macroevolution?                                               a. how selective forces change the allele
       a. Microevolution describes the evolution of                    frequencies in a population over time
           small organisms, such as insects, while                  b. the genetic basis of population-wide traits
           macroevolution describes the evolution of                c. whether traits have a genetic basis
           large organisms, like people and                         d. the degree of inbreeding in a population
           elephants.
       b. Microevolution describes the evolution of            6. Which of the following populations is not in
           microscopic entities, such as molecules                Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium?
           and proteins, while macroevolution                      a. a population with 12 homozygous
           describes the evolution of whole                            recessive individuals (yy), 8 homozygous
           organisms.                                                  dominant individuals (YY), and 4
       c. Microevolution describes the evolution of                    heterozygous individuals (Yy)
           organisms in populations, while                         b. a population in which the allele
           macroevolution describes the evolution of                   frequencies do not change over time
           species over long periods of time.                       c. p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1
       d. Microevolution describes the evolution of                d. a population undergoing natural selection
           organisms over their lifetimes, while
           macroevolution describes the evolution of           7. One of the original Amish colonies rose from a
           organisms over multiple generations.                   ship of colonists that came from Europe. The
                                                                  ship’s captain, who had polydactyly, a rare
512   19 • Critical Thinking Questions



       dominant trait, was one of the original colonists.            negatively in the offspring.
       Today, we see a much higher frequency of                   c. Inbreeding can bring together rare,
       polydactyly in the Amish population. This is an               deleterious mutations that lead to harmful
       example of:                                                   phenotypes.
         a. natural selection                                     d. Inbreeding causes normally silent alleles
         b. genetic drift                                            to be expressed.
         c. founder effect
         d. b and c                                         12. What is a cline?
                                                                 a. the slope of a mountain where a
   8. When male lions reach sexual maturity, they                    population lives
      leave their group in search of a new pride. This           b. the degree to which a mutation helps an
      can alter the allele frequencies of the population             individual survive
      through which of the following mechanisms?                 c. the number of individuals in the
        a. natural selection                                         population
        b. genetic drift                                         d. gradual geographic variation across an
        c. gene flow                                                 ecological gradient
        d. random mating
                                                            13. Which type of selection results in greater genetic
   9. Which of the following evolutionary forces can            variability in a population?
      introduce new genetic variation into a                      a. stabilizing selection
      population?                                                 b. directional selection
        a. natural selection and genetic drift                    c. diversifying selection
        b. mutation and gene flow                                 d. positive frequency-dependent selection
         c. natural selection and nonrandom mating
        d. mutation and genetic drift                       14. When males and females of a population look or
                                                                act differently, it is referred to as ________.
  10. What is assortative mating?                                 a. sexual dimorphism
       a. when individuals mate with those who are                b. sexual selection
           similar to themselves                                  c. diversifying selection
       b. when individuals mate with those who are                d. a cline
           dissimilar to themselves
       c. when individuals mate with those who are          15. The good genes hypothesis is a theory that
           the most fit in the population                       explains what?
       d. when individuals mate with those who are                a. why more fit individuals are more likely to
           least fit in the population                                have more offspring
                                                                  b. why alleles that confer beneficial traits or
  11. When closely related individuals mate with each                 behaviors are selected for by natural
      other, or inbreed, the offspring are often not as               selection
      fit as the offspring of two unrelated individuals.          c. why some deleterious mutations are
      Why?                                                            maintained in the population
         a. Close relatives are genetically                       d. why individuals of one sex develop
              incompatible.                                           impressive ornamental traits
         b. The DNA of close relatives reacts


Critical Thinking Questions
  16. Solve for the genetic structure of a population           population of flowers is undergoing evolution.
      with 12 homozygous recessive individuals (yy), 8          You suspect there is selection pressure on the
      homozygous dominant individuals (YY), and 4               color of the flower: bees seem to cluster around
      heterozygous individuals (Yy).                            the red flowers more often than the blue
                                                                flowers. In a separate experiment, you discover
  17. Explain the Hardy-Weinberg principle of
                                                                blue flower color is dominant to red flower color.
      equilibrium theory.
                                                                In a field, you count 600 blue flowers and 200
  18. Imagine you are trying to test whether a                  red flowers. What would you expect the genetic



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          19 • Critical Thinking Questions   513



    structure of the flowers to be?                    21. Explain what a cline is and provide examples.

19. Describe a situation in which a population would   22. Give an example of a trait that may have evolved
    undergo the bottleneck effect and explain what         as a result of the handicap principle and explain
    impact that would have on the population’s gene        your reasoning.
    pool.
                                                       23. List the ways in which evolution can affect
20. Describe natural selection and give an example         population variation and describe how they
    of natural selection at work in a population.          influence allele frequencies.
514   19 • Critical Thinking Questions




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 20
Phylogenies and the History of Life




FIGURE 20.1 A bee's life is very different from a flower's, but the two organisms are related. Both are members of
the domain Eukarya and have cells containing many similar organelles, genes, and proteins. (credit: modification of
work by John Beetham)


CHAPTER OUTLINE
20.1 Organizing Life on Earth
20.2 Determining Evolutionary Relationships
20.3 Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree


INTRODUCTION This bee and Echinacea flower (Figure 20.1) could not look more different, yet
they are related, as are all living organisms on Earth. By following pathways of similarities and
changes—both visible and genetic—scientists seek to map the evolutionary past of how life
developed from single-celled organisms to the tremendous collection of creatures that have
germinated, crawled, floated, swum, flown, and walked on this planet.

20.1 Organizing Life on Earth
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Discuss the need for a comprehensive classification system
   • List the different levels of the taxonomic classification system
   • Describe how systematics and taxonomy relate to phylogeny
   • Discuss a phylogenetic tree's components and purpose

In scientific terms, phylogeny is the evolutionary history and relationship of an organism or group
of organisms. A phylogeny describes the organism's relationships, such as from which organisms it
may have evolved, or to which species it is most closely related. Phylogenetic relationships
provide information on shared ancestry but not necessarily on how organisms are similar or
516   20 • Phylogenies and the History of Life



      different.

      Phylogenetic Trees
      Scientists use a tool called a phylogenetic tree to show the evolutionary pathways and
      connections among organisms. A phylogenetic tree is a diagram used to reflect evolutionary
      relationships among organisms or groups of organisms. Scientists consider phylogenetic trees to
      be a hypothesis of the evolutionary past since one cannot go back to confirm the proposed
      relationships. In other words, we can construct a “tree of life” to illustrate when different
      organisms evolved and to show the relationships among different organisms (Figure 20.2).

      Unlike a taxonomic classification diagram, we can read a phylogenetic tree like a map of
      evolutionary history. Many phylogenetic trees have a single lineage at the base representing a
      common ancestor. Scientists call such trees rooted, which means there is a single ancestral
      lineage (typically drawn from the bottom or left) to which all organisms represented in the diagram
      relate. Notice in the rooted phylogenetic tree that the three domains— Bacteria, Archaea, and
      Eukarya—diverge from a single point and branch off. The small branch that plants and animals
      (including humans) occupy in this diagram shows how recent and miniscule these groups are
      compared with other organisms. Unrooted trees do not show a common ancestor but do show
      relationships among species.




      FIGURE 20.2 Both of these phylogenetic trees show the relationship of the three domains of life—Bacteria, Archaea,
      and Eukarya—but the (a) rooted tree attempts to identify when various species diverged from a common ancestor
      while the (b) unrooted tree does not. (credit a: modification of work by Eric Gaba)

      In a rooted tree, the branching indicates evolutionary relationships (Figure 20.3). The point where
      a split occurs, a branch point, represents where a single lineage evolved into a distinct new one.
      We call a lineage that evolved early from the root that remains unbranched a basal taxon. We call
      two lineages stemming from the same branch point sister taxa. A branch with more than two
      lineages is a polytomy and serves to illustrate where scientists have not definitively determined
      all of the relationships. Note that although sister taxa and polytomy do share an ancestor, it does
      not mean that the groups of organisms split or evolved from each other. Organisms in two taxa
      may have split at a specific branch point, but neither taxon gave rise to the other.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          20.1 • Organizing Life on Earth     517




FIGURE 20.3 A phylogenetic tree's root indicates that an ancestral lineage gave rise to all organisms on the tree. A branch point indicates
where two lineages diverged. A lineage that evolved early and remains unbranched is a basal taxon. When two lineages stem from the same
branch point, they are sister taxa. A branch with more than two lineages is a polytomy.

The diagrams above can serve as a pathway to understanding evolutionary history. We can trace the pathway from
the origin of life to any individual species by navigating through the evolutionary branches between the two points.
Also, by starting with a single species and tracing back towards the "trunk" of the tree, one can discover species'
ancestors, as well as where lineages share a common ancestry. In addition, we can use the tree to study entire
groups of organisms.

Another point to mention on phylogenetic tree structure is that rotation at branch points does not change the
information. For example, if a branch point rotated and the taxon order changed, this would not alter the information
because each taxon's evolution from the branch point was independent of the other.

Many disciplines within the study of biology contribute to understanding how past and present life evolved over
time; these disciplines together contribute to building, updating, and maintaining the “tree of life.” Systematics is
the field that scientists use to organize and classify organisms based on evolutionary relationships. Researchers
may use data from fossils, from studying the body part structures, or molecules that an organism uses, and DNA
analysis. By combining data from many sources, scientists can construct an organism's phylogeny. Since
phylogenetic trees are hypotheses, they will continue to change as researchers discover new types of life and learn
new information.

Limitations of Phylogenetic Trees
It may be easy to assume that more closely related organisms look more alike, and while this is often the case, it is
not always true. If two closely related lineages evolved under significantly varied surroundings, it is possible for the
two groups to appear more different than other groups that are not as closely related. For example, the phylogenetic
tree in Figure 20.4 shows that lizards and rabbits both have amniotic eggs; whereas, frogs do not. Yet lizards and
frogs appear more similar than lizards and rabbits.




FIGURE 20.4 An organism that lacked a vertebral column roots this ladder-like phylogenetic tree of vertebrates. At each branch point,
scientists place organisms with different characters in different groups based on shared characteristics.
518   20 • Phylogenies and the History of Life



      Another aspect of phylogenetic trees is that, unless otherwise indicated, the branches do not account for length of
      time, only the evolutionary order. In other words, a branch's length does not typically mean more time passed, nor
      does a short branch mean less time passed— unless specified on the diagram. For example, in Figure 20.4, the tree
      does not indicate how much time passed between the evolution of amniotic eggs and hair. What the tree does show
      is the order in which things took place. Again using Figure 20.4, the tree shows that the oldest trait is the vertebral
      column, followed by hinged jaws, and so forth. Remember that any phylogenetic tree is a part of the greater whole,
      and like a real tree, it does not grow in only one direction after a new branch develops. Thus, for the organisms in
      Figure 20.4, just because a vertebral column evolved does not mean that invertebrate evolution ceased. It only
      means that a new branch formed. Also, groups that are not closely related, but evolve under similar conditions, may
      appear more phenotypically similar to each other than to a close relative.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      Head to this website (https://openstax.org/l/tree_of_life) to see interactive exercises that allow you to explore the
      evolutionary relationships among species.


      Classification Levels
      Taxonomy (which literally means “arrangement law”) is the science of classifying organisms to construct
      internationally shared classification systems with each organism placed into increasingly more inclusive groupings.
      Think about a grocery store's organization. One large space is divided into departments, such as produce, dairy, and
      meats. Then each department further divides into aisles, then each aisle into categories and brands, and then finally
      a single product. We call this organization from larger to smaller, more specific categories a hierarchical system.

      The taxonomic classification system (also called the Linnaean system after its inventor, Carl Linnaeus, a Swedish
      botanist, zoologist, and physician) uses a hierarchical model. Moving from the point of origin, the groups become
      more specific, until one branch ends as a single species. For example, after the common beginning of all life,
      scientists divide organisms into three large categories called domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. Within each
      domain is a second category called a kingdom. After kingdoms, the subsequent categories of increasing specificity
      are: phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species (Figure 20.5).




      FIGURE 20.5 The taxonomic classification system uses a hierarchical model to organize living organisms into increasingly specific
      categories. The common dog, Canis lupus familiaris, is a subspecies of Canis lupus, which also includes the wolf and dingo. (credit “dog”:
      modification of work by Janneke Vreugdenhil)

      The kingdom Animalia stems from the Eukarya domain. Figure 20.5 above shows the classification for the common
      dog. Therefore, the full name of an organism technically has eight terms. For the dog it is: Eukarya, Animalia,
      Chordata, Mammalia, Carnivora, Canidae, Canis, and lupus. Notice that each name is capitalized except for species,
      and the genus and species names are italicized. Scientists generally refer to an organism only by its genus and
      species, which is its two-word scientific name, or binomial nomenclature. Therefore, the scientific name of the dog
      is Canis lupus. The name at each level is also a taxon. In other words, dogs are in order Carnivora. Carnivora is the
      name of the taxon at the order level; Canidae is the taxon at the family level, and so forth. Organisms also have a
      common name that people typically use, in this case, dog. Note that the dog is additionally a subspecies: the
      “familiaris” in Canis lupus familiaris. Subspecies are members of the same species that are capable of mating and
      reproducing viable offspring, but they are separate subspecies due to geographic or behavioral isolation or other
      factors.

      Figure 20.6 shows how the levels move toward specificity with other organisms. Notice how the dog shares a



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           20.1 • Organizing Life on Earth     519



domain with the widest diversity of organisms, including plants and butterflies. At each sublevel, the organisms
become more similar because they are more closely related. Historically, scientists classified organisms using
characteristics, but as DNA technology developed, they have determined more precise phylogenies.



        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 20.6 At each sublevel in the taxonomic classification system, organisms become more similar. Dogs and wolves are the same
species because they can breed and produce viable offspring, but they are different enough to be classified as different subspecies. (credit
“plant”: modification of work by "berduchwal"/Flickr; credit “insect”: modification of work by Jon Sullivan; credit “fish”: modification of
work by Christian Mehlführer; credit “rabbit”: modification of work by Aidan Wojtas; credit “cat”: modification of work by Jonathan Lidbeck;
credit “fox”: modification of work by Kevin Bacher, NPS; credit “jackal”: modification of work by Thomas A. Hermann, NBII, USGS; credit
“wolf”: modification of work by Robert Dewar; credit “dog”: modification of work by "digital_image_fan"/Flickr)

At what levels are cats and dogs part of the same group?


     LINK TO LEARNING
Visit this website (https://openstax.org/l/classify_life) to explore the classifications of thousands of organisms. This
520   20 • Phylogenies and the History of Life



      reference site contains about 10% of the described species on the planet.


      Recent genetic analysis and other advancements have found that some earlier phylogenetic classifications do not
      align with the evolutionary past; therefore, researchers must make changes and updates as new discoveries occur.
      Recall that phylogenetic trees are hypotheses and are modified as data becomes available. In addition,
      classification historically has focused on grouping organisms mainly by shared characteristics and does not
      necessarily illustrate how the various groups relate to each other from an evolutionary perspective. For example,
      despite the fact that a hippopotamus resembles a pig more than a whale, the hippopotamus may be the whale's
      closest living relative.

      20.2 Determining Evolutionary Relationships
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Compare homologous and analogous traits
         • Discuss the purpose of cladistics
         • Describe maximum parsimony

      Scientists must collect accurate information that allows them to make evolutionary connections among organisms.
      Similar to detective work, scientists must use evidence to uncover the facts. In the case of phylogeny, evolutionary
      investigations focus on two types of evidence: morphologic (form and function) and genetic.

      Two Options for Similarities
      In general, organisms that share similar physical features and genomes are more closely related than those that do
      not. We refer to such features that overlap both morphologically (in form) and genetically as homologous structures.
      They stem from developmental similarities that are based on evolution. For example, the bones in bat and bird
      wings have homologous structures. This is an example of morphological homology (Figure 20.7).




      FIGURE 20.7 Bat and bird wings are homologous structures, indicating that bats and birds share a common evolutionary past. (credit a:
      modification of work by Steve Hillebrand, USFWS; credit b: modification of work by U.S. DOI BLM)

      Notice it is not simply a single bone, but rather a grouping of several bones arranged in a similar way. The more
      complex the feature, the more likely any kind of overlap is due to a common evolutionary past. Imagine two people
      from different countries both inventing a car with all the same parts and in exactly the same arrangement without
      any previous or shared knowledge. That outcome would be highly improbable. However, if two people both invented
      a hammer, we can reasonably conclude that both could have the original idea without the help of the other. The
      same relationship between complexity and shared evolutionary history is true for homologous structures in
      organisms.

      Misleading Appearances
      Some organisms may be very closely related, even though a minor genetic change caused a major morphological




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            20.2 • Determining Evolutionary Relationships       521



difference to make them look quite different. Similarly, unrelated organisms may be distantly related, but appear
very much alike. This usually happens because both organisms share common adaptations that evolved within
similar environmental conditions. When similar characteristics occur because of environmental constraints and not
due to a close evolutionary relationship, it is an analogy or homoplasy. For example, insects use wings to fly like
bats and birds, but the wing structure and embryonic origin is completely different. These are analogous structures
(Figure 20.8). On the other side, the bird and bat wings are homologous because the bones are inherited from a
common ancestor, while the wings themselves are analogous as they evolved independently.

Similar traits can be either homologous or analogous. Homologous structures share a similar embryonic origin.
Analogous organs have a similar function. For example, the bones in a whale's front flipper are homologous to the
bones in the human arm. These structures are not analogous. A butterfly or bird's wings are analogous but not
homologous. Scientists must determine which type of similarity a feature exhibits to decipher the organisms'
phylogeny.




FIGURE 20.8 The (c) wing of a honeybee is similar in shape to a (b) bird wing and (a) bat wing, and it serves the same function. However,
the honeybee wing is not composed of bones and has a distinctly different structure and embryonic origin. These wing types (insect versus
bat and bird) illustrate an analogy—similar structures that do not share an evolutionary history. (credit a: modification of work by U.S. DOI
BLM; credit b: modification of work by Steve Hillebrand, USFWS; credit c: modification of work by Jon Sullivan)


     LINK TO LEARNING
This website (https://openstax.org/l/relationships) has several examples to show how appearances can be
misleading in understanding organisms' phylogenetic relationships.


Molecular Comparisons
The advancement of DNA technology has given rise to molecular systematics, which is use of molecular data in
taxonomy and biological geography (biogeography). New computer programs not only confirm many earlier
classified organisms, but also uncover previously made errors. As with physical characteristics, even the DNA
sequence can be tricky to read in some cases. For some situations, two very closely related organisms can appear
unrelated if a mutation occurred that caused a shift in the genetic code. Inserting or deleting a mutation would move
each nucleotide base over one place, causing two similar codes to appear unrelated.

Sometimes two segments of DNA code in distantly related organisms randomly share a high percentage of bases in
the same locations, causing these organisms to appear closely related when they are not. For both of these
522   20 • Phylogenies and the History of Life



      situations, computer technologies help identify the actual relationships, and, ultimately, the coupled use of both
      morphologic and molecular information is more effective in determining phylogeny.



              EVOLUTION CONNECTION

      Why Does Phylogeny Matter?
      Evolutionary biologists could list many reasons why understanding phylogeny is important to everyday life in human
      society. For botanists, phylogeny acts as a guide to discovering new plants that can be used to benefit people. Think
      of all the ways humans use plants—food, medicine, and clothing are a few examples. If a plant contains a compound
      that is effective in treating cancer, scientists might want to examine all of the compounds for other useful drugs.

      A research team in China identified a DNA segment that they thought to be common to some medicinal plants in the
      family Fabaceae (the legume family) (Figure 20.9). They worked to identify which species had this segment. After
      testing plant species in this family, the team found a DNA marker (a known location on a chromosome that enabled
      them to identify the species) present. Then, using the DNA to uncover phylogenetic relationships, the team could
      identify whether a newly discovered plant was in this family and assess its potential medicinal properties.




      FIGURE 20.9 Dalbergia sissoo (D. sissoo) is in the Fabaceae, or legume family. Scientists found that D. sissoo shares a DNA marker with
      species within the Fabaceae family that have antifungal properties. Subsequently, researchers found that D. sissoo had fungicidal activity,
      supporting the idea that DNA markers are useful to screen plants with potential medicinal properties.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        20.2 • Determining Evolutionary Relationships   523



Building Phylogenetic Trees
How do scientists construct phylogenetic trees? After they sort the homologous and analogous traits, scientists
often organize the homologous traits using cladistics. This system sorts organisms into clades: groups of organisms
that descended from a single ancestor. For example, in Figure 20.10, all the organisms in the orange region evolved
from a single ancestor that had amniotic eggs. Consequently, these organisms also have amniotic eggs and make a
single clade, or a monophyletic group. Clades must include all descendants from a branch point.



        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 20.10 Lizards, rabbits, and humans all descend from a common ancestor that had an amniotic egg. Thus, lizards, rabbits, and
humans all belong to the clade Amniota. Vertebrata is a larger clade that also includes fish and lamprey.

Which animals in this figure belong to a clade that includes animals with hair? Which evolved first, hair or the
amniotic egg?


Clades can vary in size depending on which branch point one references. The important factor is that all organisms
in the clade or monophyletic group stem from a single point on the tree. You can remember this because
monophyletic breaks down into “mono,” meaning one, and “phyletic,” meaning evolutionary relationship. Figure
20.11 shows various clade examples. Notice how each clade comes from a single point; whereas, the non-clade
groups show branches that do not share a single point.
524   20 • Phylogenies and the History of Life




              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 20.11 All the organisms within a clade stem from a single point on the tree. A clade may contain multiple groups, as in the case of
      animals, fungi and plants, or a single group, as in the case of flagellates. Groups that diverge at a different branch point, or that do not
      include all groups in a single branch point, are not clades.

      What is the largest clade in this diagram?


      Shared Characteristics
      Organisms evolve from common ancestors and then diversify. Scientists use the phrase “descent with modification”
      because even though related organisms have many of the same characteristics and genetic codes, changes occur.
      This pattern repeats as one goes through the phylogenetic tree of life:

        1.   A change in an organism's genetic makeup leads to a new trait which becomes prevalent in the group.
        2.   Many organisms descend from this point and have this trait.
        3.   New variations continue to arise: some are adaptive and persist, leading to new traits.
        4.   With new traits, a new branch point is determined (go back to step 1 and repeat).

      If a characteristic is found in the ancestor of a group, it is considered a shared ancestral character because all of
      the organisms in the taxon or clade have that trait. The vertebrate in Figure 20.10 is a shared ancestral character.
      Now consider the amniotic egg characteristic in the same figure. Only some of the organisms in Figure 20.10 have
      this trait, and to those that do, it is called a shared derived character because this trait derived at some point but
      does not include all of the ancestors in the tree.

      The tricky aspect to shared ancestral and shared derived characters is that these terms are relative. We can
      consider the same trait one or the other depending on the particular diagram that we use. Returning to Figure 20.10,
      note that the amniotic egg is a shared ancestral character for lizards, rabbits, and humans, while having hair is a
      shared derived character only for humans and rabbits. For the Amniotes as a group, however, the amniotic egg is a
      shared derived character that is not seen in fish. These terms help scientists distinguish between clades in building
      phylogenetic trees.

      Choosing the Right Relationships
      Imagine being the person responsible for organizing all department store items properly—an overwhelming task.
      Organizing the evolutionary relationships of all life on Earth proves much more difficult: scientists must span


      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              20.3 • Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree   525



enormous blocks of time and work with information from long-extinct organisms. Trying to decipher the proper
connections, especially given the presence of homologies and analogies, makes the task of building an accurate tree
of life extraordinarily difficult. Add to that advancing DNA technology, which now provides large quantities of genetic
sequences for researchers to use and analyze. Taxonomy is a subjective discipline: many organisms have more than
one connection to each other, so each taxonomist will decide the order of connections.

To aid in the tremendous task of describing phylogenies accurately, scientists often use the concept of maximum
parsimony, which means that events occurred in the simplest, most obvious way. For example, if a group of people
entered a forest preserve to hike, based on the principle of maximum parsimony, one could predict that most would
hike on established trails rather than forge new ones.

For scientists deciphering evolutionary pathways, the same idea is used: the pathway of evolution probably includes
the fewest major events that coincide with the evidence at hand. Starting with all of the homologous traits in a group
of organisms, scientists look for the most obvious and simple order of evolutionary events that led to the occurrence
of those traits.

    LINK TO LEARNING
Head to this website (https://openstax.org/l/using_parsimony) to learn how researchers use maximum parsimony to
create phylogenetic trees.

These tools and concepts are only a few strategies scientists use to tackle the task of revealing the evolutionary
history of life on Earth. Recently, newer technologies have uncovered surprising discoveries with unexpected
relationships, such as the fact that people seem to be more closely related to fungi than fungi are to plants. Sound
unbelievable? As the information about DNA sequences grows, scientists will become closer to mapping the
evolutionary history of all life on Earth.


20.3 Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Describe horizontal gene transfer
   • Illustrate how prokaryotes and eukaryotes transfer genes horizontally
   • Identify the web and ring models of phylogenetic relationships and describe how they differ from the
      original phylogenetic tree concept

Phylogenetic modeling concepts are constantly changing. It is one of the most dynamic fields of study in all biology.
Over the last several decades, new research has challenged scientists’ ideas about how organisms are related. The
scientific community has proposed new models of these relationships.

Many phylogenetic trees are models of the evolutionary relationship among species. Phylogenetic trees originated
with Charles Darwin, who sketched the first phylogenetic tree in 1837 (Figure 20.12a). This served as a prototype
for subsequent studies for more than a century. The phylogenetic tree concept with a single trunk representing a
shared ancestry, with the branches representing the divergence of species from this ancestry, fits well with the
structure of many common trees, such as the oak (Figure 20.12b). However, evidence from modern DNA sequence
analysis and newly developed computer algorithms has caused skepticism about the standard tree model's validity
in the scientific community.
526   20 • Phylogenies and the History of Life




      FIGURE 20.12 The (a) concept of the “tree of life” dates to an 1837 Charles Darwin sketch. Like an (b) oak tree, the “tree of life” has a
      single trunk and many branches. (credit b: modification of work by "Amada44"/Wikimedia Commons)

      Limitations to the Classic Model
      Classical thinking about prokaryotic evolution, included in the classic tree model, is that species evolve clonally.
      That is, they produce offspring themselves with only random mutations causing the descent into the variety of
      modern-day and extinct species known to science. This view is somewhat complicated in eukaryotes that reproduce
      sexually, but the laws of Mendelian genetics explain the variation in offspring, again, to be a result of a mutation
      within the species. Scientists did not consider the concept of genes transferring between unrelated species as a
      possibility until relatively recently. Horizontal gene transfer (HGT), or lateral gene transfer, is the transfer of genes
      between unrelated species. HGT is an ever-present phenomenon, with many evolutionists postulating a major role
      for this process in evolution, thus complicating the simple tree model. Genes pass between species which are only
      distantly related using standard phylogeny, thus adding a layer of complexity to understanding phylogenetic
      relationships.

      The various ways that HGT occurs in prokaryotes is important to understanding phylogenies. Although at present
      some do not view HGT as important to eukaryotic evolution, HGT does occur in this domain as well. Finally, as an
      example of the ultimate gene transfer, some scientists have proposed genome fusion theories between symbiotic or
      endosymbiotic organisms to explain an event of great importance—the evolution of the first eukaryotic cell, without
      which humans could not have come into existence.

      Horizontal Gene Transfer
      Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is the introduction of genetic material from one species to another species by
      mechanisms other than the vertical transmission from parent(s) to offspring. These transfers allow even distantly
      related species to share genes, influencing their phenotypes. Scientists believe that HGT is more prevalent in
      prokaryotes, but that this process transfers only about 2% of the prokaryotic genome. Some researchers believe
      such estimates are premature: we must view the actual importance of HGT to evolutionary processes as a work in
      progress. As scientists investigate this phenomenon more thoroughly, they may reveal more HGT. Many scientists
      believe that HGT and mutation are (especially in prokaryotes) a significant source of genetic variation, which is the
      raw material in the natural selection process. These transfers may occur between any two species that share an
      intimate relationship (Table 20.1).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              20.3 • Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree   527




                               Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic HGT Mechanisms Summary

                                Mechanism           Mode of Transmission                   Example

            Prokaryotes     transformation           DNA uptake                 many prokaryotes

                            transduction             bacteriophage (virus)      bacteria

                            conjugation              pilus                      many prokaryotes

                            gene transfer agents     phage-like particles       purple non-sulfur bacteria

            Eukaryotes      from food organisms      unknown                    aphid

                            jumping genes            transposons                rice and millet plants

                            epiphytes/parasites      unknown                    yew tree fungi

                            from viral infections

          TABLE 20.1

HGT in Prokaryotes
HGT mechanisms are quite common in the Bacteria and Archaea domains, thus significantly changing the way
scientists view their evolution. The majority of evolutionary models, such as in the Endosymbiont Theory, propose
that eukaryotes descended from multiple prokaryotes, which makes HGT all the more important to understanding
the phylogenetic relationships of all extant and extinct species. The Endosymbiont Theory purports that the
eukaryotes' mitochondria and the green plants' chloroplasts and flagellates originated as free-living prokaryotes
that invaded primitive eukaryotic cells and become established as permanent symbionts in the cytoplasm.

Microbiology students are well aware that genes transfer among common bacteria. These gene transfers between
species are the major mechanism whereby bacteria acquire resistance to antibiotics. Classically, scientists believe
that three different mechanisms drive such transfers.

  1. Transformation: bacteria takes up naked DNA
  2. Transduction: a virus transfers the genes
  3. Conjugation: a hollow tube, or pilus transfers genes between organisms

More recently, scientists have discovered a fourth gene transfer mechanism between prokaryotes. Small, virus-like
particles, or gene transfer agents (GTAs) transfer random genomic segments from one prokaryote species to
another. GTAs are responsible for genetic changes, sometimes at a very high frequency compared to other
evolutionary processes. Scientists characterized the first GTA in 1974 using purple, non-sulfur bacteria. These GTAs,
which are most likely derived from bacteriophage DNA inserted in a prokaryote that lost the ability to produce new
bacteriophages, carry random DNA pieces from one organism to another. Controlled studies using marine bacteria
have demonstrated GTAs' ability to act with high frequency. Scientists have estimated gene transfer events in
marine prokaryotes, either by GTAs or by viruses, to be as high as 1013 per year in the Mediterranean Sea alone.
GTAs and viruses are efficient HGT vehicles with a major impact on prokaryotic evolution.

As a consequence of this modern DNA analysis, the idea that eukaryotes evolved directly from Archaea has fallen
out of favor. While eukaryotes share many features that are absent in bacteria, such as the TATA box (located in
many genes' promoter region), the discovery that some eukaryotic genes were more homologous with bacterial DNA
than Archaea DNA made this idea less tenable. Furthermore, scientists have proposed genome fusion from Archaea
and Bacteria by endosymbiosis as the ultimate event in eukaryotic evolution.

HGT in Eukaryotes
Although it is easy to see how prokaryotes exchange genetic material by HGT, scientists initially thought that this
528   20 • Phylogenies and the History of Life



      process was absent in eukaryotes. After all, prokaryotes are but single cells exposed directly to their environment;
      whereas, the multicellular organisms' sex cells are usually sequestered in protected parts of the body. It follows
      from this idea that the gene transfers between multicellular eukaryotes should be more difficult. Scientists believe
      this process is rarer in eukaryotes and has a much smaller evolutionary impact than in prokaryotes. In spite of this,
      HGT between distantly related organisms is evident in several eukaryotic species, and it is possible that scientists
      will discover more examples in the future.

      In plants, researchers have observed gene transfer in species that cannot cross-pollinate by normal means.
      Transposons or “jumping genes” have shown a transfer between rice and millet plant species. Furthermore, fungal
      species feeding on yew trees, from which the anti-cancer drug TAXOL® is derived from the bark, have acquired the
      ability to make taxol themselves, a clear example of gene transfer.

      In animals, a particularly interesting example of HGT occurs within the aphid species (Figure 20.13). Aphids are
      insects that vary in color based on carotenoid content. Carotenoids are pigments that a variety of plants, fungi, and
      microbes produce, and they serve a variety of functions in animals, who obtain these chemicals from their food.
      Humans require carotenoids to synthesize vitamin A, and we obtain them by eating orange fruits and vegetables:
      carrots, apricots, mangoes, and sweet potatoes. Alternatively, aphids have acquired the ability to make the
      carotenoids on their own. According to DNA analysis, this ability is due to fungal genes transferring into the insect by
      HGT, presumably as the insect consumed fungi for food. A carotenoid enzyme, or desaturase, is responsible for the
      red coloration in certain aphids, and when mutation of this gene leads to formation of inactive enzyme, the aphids
      revert to their more common green color (Figure 20.13).




      FIGURE 20.13 (a) Red aphids get their color from red carotenoid pigment. Genes necessary to make this pigment are present in certain
      fungi, and scientists speculate that aphids acquired these genes through HGT after consuming fungi for food. If mutation inactivates the
      genes for making carotenoids, the aphids revert back to (b) their green color. Red coloration makes the aphids considerably more
      conspicuous to predators, but evidence suggests that red aphids are more resistant to insecticides than green ones. Thus, red aphids may
      be more fit to survive in some environments than green ones. (credit a: modification of work by Benny Mazur; credit b: modification of work
      by Mick Talbot)

      Genome Fusion and Eukaryote Evolution
      Scientists believe the ultimate in HGT occurs through genome fusion between different prokaryote species when
      two symbiotic organisms become endosymbiotic. This occurs when one species is taken inside another species'
      cytoplasm, which ultimately results in a genome consisting of genes from both the endosymbiont and the host. This
      mechanism is an aspect of the Endosymbiont Theory, which most biologists accept as the mechanism whereby
      eukaryotic cells obtained their mitochondria and chloroplasts. However, the role of endosymbiosis in developing the
      nucleus is more controversial. Scientists believe that nuclear and mitochondrial DNA have different (separate)
      evolutionary origins, with the mitochondrial DNA being derived from the bacteria's circular genomes engulfed by
      ancient prokaryotic cells. We can regard mitochondrial DNA as the smallest chromosome. Interestingly enough,
      mitochondrial DNA is inherited only from females. The mitochondrial DNA degrades in sperm when the sperm
      degrades in the fertilized egg or in other instances when the mitochondria located in the sperm's flagellum fails to
      enter the egg.

      Within the past decade, James Lake of the UCLA/NASA Astrobiology Institute proposed that the genome fusion
      process is responsible for the evolution of the first eukaryotic cells (Figure 20.14a). Using DNA analysis and a new
      mathematical algorithm, conditioned reconstruction (CR), his laboratory proposed that eukaryotic cells developed
      from an endosymbiotic gene fusion between two species, one an Archaea and the other a Bacteria. As mentioned,




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         20.3 • Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree   529



some eukaryotic genes resemble those of Archaea; whereas, others resemble those from Bacteria. An
endosymbiotic fusion event, such as Lake has proposed, would clearly explain this observation. Alternatively, this
work is new and the CR algorithm is relatively unsubstantiated, which causes many scientists to resist this
hypothesis.

Lake's more recent work (Figure 20.14b) proposes that gram-negative bacteria, which are unique within their
domain in that they contain two lipid bilayer membranes, resulted from an endosymbiotic fusion of archaeal and
bacterial species. The double membrane would be a direct result of the endosymbiosis, with the endosymbiont
picking up the second membrane from the host as it was internalized. Scientists have also used this mechanism to
explain the double membranes in mitochondria and chloroplasts. Some are skeptical of Lake’s work, and the
biological science community still debates his ideas. In addition to Lake’s hypothesis, there are several other
competing theories as to the origin of eukaryotes. How did the eukaryotic nucleus evolve? One theory is that the
prokaryotic cells produced an additional membrane that surrounded the bacterial chromosome. Some bacteria have
the DNA enclosed by two membranes; however, there is no evidence of a nucleolus or nuclear pores. Other
proteobacteria also have membrane-bound chromosomes. If the eukaryotic nucleus evolved this way, we would
expect one of the two types of prokaryotes to be more closely related to eukaryotes.




FIGURE 20.14 The scientific community now widely accepts the theory that mitochondria and chloroplasts are endosymbiotic in origin.
More controversial is the proposal that (a) the eukaryotic nucleus resulted from fusing archaeal and bacterial genomes with their
operational genes (whose products are involved in biochemical pathways) and informational genes (whose products are involved in
transcription and translation), and that (b) Gramnegative bacteria, which have two membranes, resulted from fusing Archaea and Gram-
positive bacteria, each of which has a single membrane.

The nucleus-first hypothesis proposes that the nucleus evolved in prokaryotes first (Figure 20.15a), followed by a
later fusion of the new eukaryote with bacteria that became mitochondria. The mitochondria-first hypothesis
proposes that mitochondria were first established in a prokaryotic host (Figure 20.15b), which subsequently
acquired a nucleus, by fusion or other mechanisms, to become the first eukaryotic cell. Most interestingly, the
eukaryote-first hypothesis proposes that prokaryotes actually evolved from eukaryotes by losing genes and
complexity (Figure 20.15c). All of these hypotheses are testable. Only time and more experimentation will
determine which hypothesis data best supports.
530   20 • Phylogenies and the History of Life




      FIGURE 20.15 Three alternate hypotheses of eukaryotic and prokaryotic evolution are (a) the nucleus-first hypothesis, (b) the
      mitochondrion-first hypothesis, and (c) the eukaryote-first hypothesis.

      Web and Network Models
      Recognizing the importance of HGT, especially in prokaryote evolution, has caused some to propose abandoning the
      classic “tree of life” model. In 1999, W. Ford Doolittle proposed a phylogenetic model that resembles a web or a
      network more than a tree. The hypothesis is that eukaryotes evolved not from a single prokaryotic ancestor, but
      from a pool of many species that were sharing genes by HGT mechanisms. As Figure 20.16a shows, some individual
      prokaryotes were responsible for transferring the bacteria that caused mitochondrial development to the new
      eukaryotes; whereas, other species transferred the bacteria that gave rise to chloroplasts. Scientists often call this
      model the “web of life.” In an effort to save the tree analogy, some have proposed using the Ficus tree (Figure
      20.16b) with its multiple trunks as a phylogenetic way to represent a diminished evolutionary role for HGT.




      FIGURE 20.16 In W. Ford Doolittle's (a) phylogenetic model, the “tree of life” arose from a community of ancestral cells, has multiple
      trunks, and has connections between branches where horizontal gene transfer has occurred. Visually, this concept is better represented by
      (b) the multi-trunked Ficus than by an oak's single trunk similar to Darwin's tree in Figure 20.12. (credit b: modification of work by



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            20.3 • Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree     531



"psyberartist"/Flickr)

Ring of Life Models
Others have proposed abandoning any tree-like model of phylogeny in favor of a ring structure, the so-called “ring
of life” (Figure 20.17). This is a phylogenetic model where all three domains of life evolved from a pool of primitive
prokaryotes. Lake, again using the conditioned reconstruction algorithm, proposes a ring-like model in which
species of all three domains—Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya—evolved from a single pool of gene-swapping
prokaryotes. His laboratory proposes that this structure is the best fit for data from extensive DNA analyses
performed in his laboratory, and that the ring model is the only one that adequately takes HGT and genomic fusion
into account. However, other phylogeneticists remain highly skeptical of this model.




  FIGURE 20.17 According to the “ring of life” phylogenetic model, the three domains of life evolved from a pool of primitive prokaryotes.

In summary, we must modify Darwin's “tree of life” model to include HGT. Does this mean abandoning the tree
model completely? Even Lake argues that scientists should attempt to modify the tree model to allow it to
accurately fit his data, and only the inability to do so will sway people toward his ring proposal.

This doesn’t mean a tree, web, or a ring will correlate completely to an accurate description of phylogenetic
relationships of life. A consequence of the new thinking about phylogenetic models is the idea that Darwin’s original
phylogenetic tree concept is too simple, but made sense based on what scientists knew at the time. However, the
search for a more useful model moves on: each model serves as hypotheses to test with the possibility of
developing new models. This is how science advances. Researchers use these models as visualizations to help
construct hypothetical evolutionary relationships and understand the massive amount of data that requires analysis.
532   20 • Key Terms




Key Terms
analogy (also, homoplasy) characteristic that is              evidence to identify phylogenetic relationships
   similar between organisms by convergent evolution,      monophyletic group (also, clade) organisms that
   not due to the same evolutionary path                      share a single ancestor
basal taxon branch on a phylogenetic tree that has         nucleus-first hypothesis proposal that prokaryotes
   not diverged significantly from the root ancestor          acquired a nucleus first, and then the mitochondrion
binomial nomenclature system of two-part scientific        order class division in the taxonomic classification
   names for an organism, which includes genus and            system
   species names                                           phylogenetic tree diagram that reflects the
branch point node on a phylogenetic tree where a              evolutionary relationships among organisms or
   single lineage splits into distinct new ones               groups of organisms
cladistics system to organize homologous traits to         phylogeny evolutionary history and relationship of an
   describe phylogenies                                       organism or group of organisms
class division of phylum in the taxonomic                  phylum (plural: phyla) kingdom division in the
   classification system                                      taxonomic classification system
eukaryote-first hypothesis proposal that                   polytomy branch on a phylogenetic tree with more
   prokaryotes evolved from eukaryotes                        than two groups or taxa
family division of order in the taxonomic                  ring of life phylogenetic model where all three
   classification system                                      domains of life evolved from a pool of primitive
gene transfer agent (GTA) bacteriophage-like                  prokaryotes
   particle that transfers random genomic segments         rooted single ancestral lineage on a phylogenetic tree
   from one species of prokaryote to another                  to which all organisms represented in the diagram
genome fusion fusion of two prokaryotic genomes,              relate
   presumably by endosymbiosis                             shared ancestral character describes a
genus division of family in the taxonomic                     characteristic on a phylogenetic tree that all
   classification system; the first part of the binomial      organisms on the tree share
   scientific name                                         shared derived character describes a characteristic
homology similarity in characteristics resulting from a       on a phylogenetic tree that only a certain clade of
   shared ancestry                                            organisms share
horizontal gene transfer (HGT) (also, lateral gene         sister taxa two lineages that diverged from the same
   transfer) transfer of genes between unrelated              branch point
   species                                                 systematics field of organizing and classifying
kingdom domain division in the taxonomic                      organisms based on evolutionary relationships
   classification system                                   taxon (plural: taxa) single level in the taxonomic
maximum parsimony applying the simplest, most                 classification system
   obvious way with the least number of steps              taxonomy science of classifying organisms
mitochondria-first hypothesis proposal that                web of life phylogenetic model that attempts to
   prokaryotes acquired a mitochondrion first, followed       incorporate the effects of horizontal gene transfer
   by nuclear development                                     on evolution
molecular systematics technique using molecular

Chapter Summary
20.1 Organizing Life on Earth                              scientists build phylogenetic trees to illustrate
                                                           evolutionary relationships.
Scientists continually gain new information that helps
understand the evolutionary history of life on Earth.      20.2 Determining Evolutionary
Each group of organisms went through its own               Relationships
evolutionary journey, or its phylogeny. Each organism
                                                           To build phylogenetic trees, scientists must collect
shares relatedness with others, and based on
                                                           accurate information that allows them to make
morphologic and genetic evidence, scientists attempt
                                                           evolutionary connections between organisms. Using
to map the evolutionary pathways of all life on Earth.
                                                           morphologic and molecular data, scientists work to
Historically, scientists organized organisms into a
                                                           identify homologous characteristics and genes.
taxonomic classification system. However, today many



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               20 • Visual Connection Questions   533



Similarities between organisms can stem either from        this would be the path with the least number of major
shared evolutionary history (homologies) or from           divergences that correlate with the evidence.
separate evolutionary paths (analogies). Scientists can
use newer technologies to help distinguish homologies
                                                           20.3 Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
from analogies. After identifying homologous               The phylogenetic tree, which Darwin first used, is the
information, scientists use cladistics to organize these   classic “tree of life” model describing phylogenetic
events as a means to determine an evolutionary             relationships among species, and the most common
timeline. They then apply the concept of maximum           model that scientists use today. New ideas about HGT
parsimony, which states that the order of events           and genome fusion have caused some to suggest
probably occurred in the most obvious and simple way       revising the model to resemble webs or rings.
with the least amount of steps. For evolutionary events,

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 20.6 At what levels are cats and dogs part          evolved first, hair or the amniotic egg?
      of the same group?
                                                              3. Figure 20.11 What is the largest clade in this
   2. Figure 20.10 Which animals in this figure belong           diagram?
      to a clade that includes animals with hair? Which

Review Questions
   4. What is used to determine phylogeny?                         c. They are derived by similar environmental
       a. mutations                                                   constraints.
       b. DNA                                                      d. They are a form of mutation.
       c. evolutionary history
       d. organisms on earth                                  9. What do scientists use to apply cladistics?
                                                                  a. homologous traits
   5. What do scientists in the field of systematics              b. homoplasies
      accomplish?                                                 c. analogous traits
        a. discover new fossil sites                              d. monophyletic groups
        b. organize and classify organisms
        c. name new species                                 10. What is true about organisms that are a part of
        d. communicate among field biologists                   the same clade?
                                                                  a. They all share the same basic
   6. Which statement about the taxonomic                             characteristics.
      classification system is correct?                           b. They evolved from a shared ancestor.
        a. There are more domains than kingdoms.                  c. They usually fall into the same
        b. Kingdoms are the top category of                           classification taxa.
            classification.                                       d. They have identical phylogenies.
        c. Classes are divisions of orders.
        d. Subspecies are the most specific category        11. Why do scientists apply the concept of
            of classification.                                  maximum parsimony?
                                                                 a. to decipher accurate phylogenies
   7. On a phylogenetic tree, which term refers to               b. to eliminate analogous traits
      lineages that diverged from the same place?                c. to identify mutations in DNA codes
         a. sister taxa                                          d. to locate homoplasies
         b. basal taxa
         c. rooted taxa                                     12. The transfer of genes by a mechanism not
         d. dichotomous taxa                                    involving reproduction is called:
                                                                  a. meiosis
   8. Which statement about analogies is correct?                 b. web of life
       a. They occur only as errors.                              c. horizontal gene transfer
       b. They are synonymous with homologous                     d. gene fusion
           traits.
                                                            13. Particles that transfer genetic material from one
534   20 • Critical Thinking Questions



       species to another, especially in marine               c. new species
       prokaryotes:                                           d. old species
         a. horizontal gene transfer
         b. lateral gene transfer                       15. Which phylogenetic model proposes that all
         c. genome fusion device                            three domains of life evolved from a pool of
         d. gene transfer agents                            primitive prokaryotes?
                                                              a. tree of life
  14. What does the trunk of the classic phylogenetic         b. web of life
      tree represent?                                         c. ring of life
        a. single common ancestor                             d. network model
        b. pool of ancestral organisms


Critical Thinking Questions
  16. How does a phylogenetic tree relate to the        20. Why is it so important for scientists to
      passing of time?                                      distinguish between homologous and analogous
                                                            characteristics before building phylogenetic
  17. Some organisms that appear very closely related
                                                            trees?
      on a phylogenetic tree may not actually be
      closely related. Why is this?                     21. Describe maximum parsimony.

  18. List the different levels of the taxonomic        22. Compare three different ways that eukaryotic
      classification system.                                cells may have evolved.

  19. Dolphins and fish have similar body shapes. Is    23. Describe how aphids acquired the ability to
      this feature more likely a homologous or              change color.
      analogous trait?




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 21
Viruses




FIGURE 21.1 The tobacco mosaic virus, seen here by transmission electron microscopy (left), was the first virus to
be discovered. The virus causes disease in tobacco and other plants, such as the orchid (right). (credit a: USDA ARS;
credit b: modification of work by USDA Forest Service, Department of Plant Pathology Archive North Carolina State
University; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)


CHAPTER OUTLINE
21.1 Viral Evolution, Morphology, and Classification
21.2 Virus Infections and Hosts
21.3 Prevention and Treatment of Viral Infections
21.4 Other Acellular Entities: Prions and Viroids


INTRODUCTION Viruses are noncellular parasitic entities that cannot be classified within any
kingdom. They can infect organisms as diverse as bacteria, plants, and animals. In fact, viruses
exist in a sort of netherworld between a living organism and a nonliving entity. Living things grow,
metabolize, and reproduce. In contrast, viruses are not cellular, do not have a metabolism or grow,
and cannot divide by cell division. Viruses can copy, or replicate themselves; however, they are
entirely dependent on resources derived from their host cells to produce progeny viruses—which
are assembled in their mature form. No one knows exactly when or how viruses evolved or from
what ancestral source because viruses have not left a fossil record. Some virologists contend that
modern viruses are a mosaic of bits and pieces of nucleic acids picked up from various sources
along their respective evolutionary paths.

21.1 Viral Evolution, Morphology, and Classification
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Describe how viruses were first discovered and how they are detected
   • Discuss three hypotheses about how viruses evolved
   • Describe the general structure of a virus
   • Recognize the basic shapes of viruses
   • Understand past and emerging classification systems for viruses
   • Describe the basis for the Baltimore classification system

Viruses are diverse entities: They vary in structure, methods of replication, and the hosts they
infect. Nearly all forms of life—from prokaryotic bacteria and archaeans, to eukaryotes such as
plants, animals, and fungi—have viruses that infect them. While most biological diversity can be
understood through evolutionary history (such as how species have adapted to changing
536   21 • Viruses



      environmental conditions and how different species are related to one another through common
      descent), much about virus origins and evolution remains unknown.

      Discovery and Detection
      Viruses were first discovered after the development of a porcelain filter—the Chamberland-
      Pasteur filter—that could remove all bacteria visible in the microscope from any liquid sample. In
      1886, Adolph Meyer demonstrated that a disease of tobacco plants—tobacco mosaic
      disease—could be transferred from a diseased plant to a healthy one via liquid plant extracts. In
      1892, Dmitri Ivanowski showed that this disease could be transmitted in this way even after the
      Chamberland-Pasteur filter had removed all viable bacteria from the extract. Still, it was many
      years before it was proved that these “filterable” infectious agents were not simply very small
      bacteria but were a new type of very small, disease-causing particle.

      Most virions, or single virus particles, are very small, about 20 to 250 nanometers in diameter.
      However, some recently discovered viruses from amoebae range up to 1000 nm in diameter. With
      the exception of large virions, like the poxvirus and other large DNA viruses, viruses cannot be
      seen with a light microscope. It was not until the development of the electron microscope in the
      late 1930s that scientists got their first good view of the structure of the tobacco mosaic virus
      (TMV) (Figure 21.1), discussed above, and other viruses (Figure 21.2). The surface structure of
      virions can be observed by both scanning and transmission electron microscopy, whereas the
      internal structures of the virus can only be observed in images from a transmission electron
      microscope. The use of electron microscopy and other technologies has allowed for the discovery
      of many viruses of all types of living organisms.




      FIGURE 21.2 Most virus particles are visible only by electron microscopy. In these transmission electron micrographs,
      (a) a virus is as dwarfed by the bacterial cell it infects, as (b) these E. coli cells are dwarfed by cultured colon cells.
      (credit a: modification of work by U.S. Dept. of Energy, Office of Science, LBL, PBD; credit b: modification of work by
      J.P. Nataro and S. Sears, unpub. data, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

      Evolution of Viruses
      Although biologists have a significant amount of knowledge about how present-day viruses
      mutate and adapt, much less is known about how viruses originated in the first place. When
      exploring the evolutionary history of most organisms, scientists can look at fossil records and
      similar historic evidence. However, viruses do not fossilize, as far as we know, so researchers must
      extrapolate from investigations of how today’s viruses evolve and by using biochemical and



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        21.1 • Viral Evolution, Morphology, and Classification   537



genetic information to create speculative virus histories.

Most scholars agree that viruses don’t have a single common ancestor, nor is there a single reasonable hypothesis
about virus origins. There are current evolutionary scenarios that may explain the origin of viruses. One such
hypothesis, the “devolution” or the regressive hypothesis, suggests that viruses evolved from free-living cells, or
from intracellular prokaryotic parasites. However, many components of how this process might have occurred
remain a mystery. A second hypothesis, the escapist or the progressive hypothesis, suggests that viruses originated
from RNA and DNA molecules, or self-replicating entities similar to transposons or other mobile genetic elements,
that escaped from a host cell with the ability to enter another. A third hypothesis, the virus first hypothesis, suggests
that viruses may have been the first self-replicating entities before the first cells. In all cases, viruses are probably
continuing to evolve along with the cells on which they rely on as hosts.

As technology advances, scientists may develop and refine additional hypotheses to explain the origins of viruses.
The emerging field called virus molecular systematics attempts to do just that through comparisons of sequenced
genetic material. These researchers hope one day to better understand the origin of viruses—a discovery that could
lead to advances in the treatments for the ailments they produce.

Viral Morphology
Viruses are noncellular, meaning they are biological entities that do not have a cellular structure. They therefore
lack most of the components of cells, such as organelles, ribosomes, and the plasma membrane. A virion consists of
a nucleic acid core, an outer protein coating or capsid, and sometimes an outer envelope made of protein and
phospholipid membranes derived from the host cell. Viruses may also contain additional proteins, such as enzymes,
within the capsid or attached to the viral genome. The most obvious difference between members of different viral
families is the variation in their morphology, which is quite diverse. An interesting feature of viral complexity is that
the complexity of the host does not necessarily correlate with the complexity of the virion. In fact, some of the most
complex virion structures are found in the bacteriophages—viruses that infect the simplest living organisms,
bacteria.

Morphology
Viruses come in many shapes and sizes, but these features are consistent for each viral family. As we have seen, all
virions have a nucleic acid genome covered by a protective capsid. The proteins of the capsid are encoded in the
viral genome, and are called capsomeres. Some viral capsids are simple helices or polyhedral “spheres,” whereas
others are quite complex in structure (Figure 21.3).
538   21 • Viruses




      FIGURE 21.3 Viral capsids can be (a) helical, (b) polyhedral, or (c) have a complex shape. (credit a “micrograph”: modification of work by
      USDA ARS; credit b “micrograph”: modification of work by U.S. Department of Energy)

      In general, the capsids of viruses are classified into four groups: helical, icosahedral, enveloped, and head-and-tail.
      Helical capsids are long and cylindrical. Many plant viruses are helical, including TMV. Icosahedral viruses have
      shapes that are roughly spherical, such as those of poliovirus or herpesviruses. Enveloped viruses have membranes
      derived from the host cell that surrounds the capsids. Animal viruses, such as HIV, are frequently enveloped. Head-
      and-tail viruses infect bacteria and have a head that is similar to icosahedral viruses and a tail shaped like helical
      viruses.

      Many viruses use some sort of glycoprotein to attach to their host cells via molecules on the cell called viral
      receptors. For these viruses, attachment is required for later penetration of the cell membrane; only after
      penetration takes place can the virus complete its replication inside the cell. The receptors that viruses use are
      molecules that are normally found on cell surfaces and have their own physiological functions. It appears that
      viruses have simply evolved to make use of these molecules for their own replication. For example, HIV uses the
      CD4 molecule on T lymphocytes as one of its receptors (Figure 21.4). CD4 is a type of molecule called a cell
      adhesion molecule, which functions to keep different types of immune cells in close proximity to each other during
      the generation of a T lymphocyte immune response.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  21.1 • Viral Evolution, Morphology, and Classification    539




FIGURE 21.4 A virus and its host receptor protein. The HIV virus binds the CD4 receptor on the surface of human cells. CD4 receptors help
white blood cells to communicate with other cells of the immune system when producing an immune response. (credit: modification of
work by NIAID, NIH)

One of the most complex virions known, the T4 bacteriophage (which infects the Escherichia coli) bacterium, has a
tail structure that the virus uses to attach to host cells and a head structure that houses its DNA.

Adenovirus, a non-enveloped animal virus that causes respiratory illnesses in humans, uses glycoprotein spikes
protruding from its capsomeres to attach to host cells. Non-enveloped viruses also include those that cause polio
(poliovirus), plantar warts (papillomavirus), and hepatitis A (hepatitis A virus).

Enveloped virions, such as the influenza virus, consist of nucleic acid (RNA in the case of influenza) and capsid
proteins surrounded by a phospholipid bilayer envelope that contains virus-encoded proteins. Glycoproteins
embedded in the viral envelope are used to attach to host cells. Other envelope proteins are the matrix proteins
that stabilize the envelope and often play a role in the assembly of progeny virions. Chicken pox, HIV, and mumps
are other examples of diseases caused by viruses with envelopes. Because of the fragility of the envelope, non-
enveloped viruses are more resistant to changes in temperature, pH, and some disinfectants than enveloped
viruses.

Overall, the shape of the virion and the presence or absence of an envelope tell us little about what disease the virus
may cause or what species it might infect, but they are still useful means to begin viral classification (Figure 21.5).
540   21 • Viruses




              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 21.5 Complex Viruses. Viruses can be either complex or relatively simple in shape. This figure shows three relatively complex
      virions: the bacteriophage T4, with its DNA-containing head group and tail fibers that attach to host cells; adenovirus, which uses spikes
      from its capsid to bind to host cells; and the influenza virus, which uses glycoproteins embedded in its envelope to bind to host cells. The
      influenza virus also has matrix proteins, internal to the envelope, which help stabilize the virion’s shape. (credit “bacteriophage,
      adenovirus”: modification of work by NCBI, NIH; credit "influenza virus": modification of work by Dan Higgins, Centers for Disease Control
      and Prevention)

      Which of the following statements about virus structure is true?

        a.   All viruses are encased in a viral membrane.
        b.   The capsomere is made up of small protein subunits called capsids.
        c.   DNA is the genetic material in all viruses.
        d.   Glycoproteins help the virus attach to the host cell.


      Types of Nucleic Acid
      Unlike nearly all living organisms that use DNA as their genetic material, viruses may use either DNA or RNA. The
      virus core contains the genome—the total genetic content of the virus. Viral genomes tend to be small, containing
      only those genes that encode proteins which the virus cannot get from the host cell. This genetic material may be
      single- or double-stranded. It may also be linear or circular. While most viruses contain a single nucleic acid, others
      have genomes divided into several segments. The RNA genome of the influenza virus is segmented, which
      contributes to its variability and continuous evolution, and explains why it is difficult to develop a vaccine against it.

      In DNA viruses, the viral DNA directs the host cell’s replication proteins to synthesize new copies of the viral genome
      and to transcribe and translate that genome into viral proteins. Human diseases caused by DNA viruses include
      chickenpox, hepatitis B, and adenoviruses. Sexually transmitted DNA viruses include the herpes virus and the
      human papilloma virus (HPV), which has been associated with cervical cancer and genital warts.

      RNA viruses contain only RNA as their genetic material. To replicate their genomes in the host cell, the RNA viruses
      must encode their own enzymes that can replicate RNA into RNA or, in the retroviruses, into DNA. These RNA
      polymerase enzymes are more likely to make copying errors than DNA polymerases, and therefore often make


      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      21.1 • Viral Evolution, Morphology, and Classification   541



mistakes during transcription. For this reason, mutations in RNA viruses occur more frequently than in DNA viruses.
This causes them to change and adapt more rapidly to their host. Human diseases caused by RNA viruses include
influenza, hepatitis C, measles, and rabies. The HIV virus, which is sexually transmitted, is an RNA retrovirus.

The Challenge of Virus Classification
Because most viruses probably evolved from different ancestors, the systematic methods that scientists have used
to classify prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells are not very useful. If viruses represent “remnants” of different
organisms, then even genomic or protein analysis is not useful. Why?, Because viruses have no common genomic
sequence that they all share. For example, the 16S rRNA sequence so useful for constructing prokaryote
phylogenies is of no use for a creature with no ribosomes! Biologists have used several classification systems in the
past. Viruses were initially grouped by shared morphology. Later, groups of viruses were classified by the type of
nucleic acid they contained, DNA or RNA, and whether their nucleic acid was single- or double-stranded. However,
these earlier classification methods grouped viruses differently, because they were based on different sets of
characters of the virus. The most commonly used classification method today is called the Baltimore classification
scheme, and is based on how messenger RNA (mRNA) is generated in each particular type of virus.

Past Systems of Classification
Viruses contain only a few elements by which they can be classified: the viral genome, the type of capsid, and the
envelope structure for the enveloped viruses. All of these elements have been used in the past for viral classification
(Table 21.1 and Figure 21.6). Viral genomes may vary in the type of genetic material (DNA or RNA) and its
organization (single- or double-stranded, linear or circular, and segmented or non-segmented). In some viruses,
additional proteins needed for replication are associated directly with the genome or contained within the viral
capsid.

                                      Virus Classification by Genome Structure

                       Genome Structure                                                 Examples

    • RNA                                                              • Rabies virus, retroviruses
    • DNA                                                              • Herpesviruses, smallpox virus


    • Single-stranded                                                  • Rabies virus, retroviruses
    • Double-stranded                                                  • Herpesviruses, smallpox virus


                                                                       • Rabies virus, retroviruses, herpesviruses,
    • Linear
                                                                         smallpox virus
    • Circular
                                                                       • Papillomaviruses, many bacteriophages


    • Non-segmented: genome consists of a single segment
                                                                       • Parainfluenza viruses
      of genetic material
                                                                       • Influenza viruses
    • Segmented: genome is divided into multiple segments

TABLE 21.1
542   21 • Viruses




      FIGURE 21.6 Viruses can be classified according to their core genetic material and capsid design. (a) Rabies virus has a single-stranded
      RNA (ssRNA) core and an enveloped helical capsid, whereas (b) variola virus, the causative agent of smallpox, has a double-stranded DNA
      (dsDNA) core and a complex capsid. Rabies transmission occurs when saliva from an infected mammal enters a wound. The virus travels
      through neurons in the peripheral nervous system to the central nervous system, where it impairs brain function, and then travels to other
      tissues. The virus can infect any mammal, and most die within weeks of infection. Smallpox is a human virus transmitted by inhalation of
      the variola virus, localized in the skin, mouth, and throat, which causes a characteristic rash. Before its eradication in 1979, infection
      resulted in a 30 to 35 percent mortality rate. (credit “rabies diagram”: modification of work by CDC; “rabies micrograph”: modification of
      work by Dr. Fred Murphy, CDC; credit “small pox micrograph”: modification of work by Dr. Fred Murphy, Sylvia Whitfield, CDC; credit
      “smallpox photo”: modification of work by CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

      Viruses can also be classified by the design of their capsids (Table 21.2 and Figure 21.7). Capsids are classified as
      naked icosahedral, enveloped icosahedral, enveloped helical, naked helical, and complex. The type of genetic
      material (DNA or RNA) and its structure (single- or double-stranded, linear or circular, and segmented or non-
      segmented) are used to classify the virus core structures (Table 21.2).

                                                    Virus Classification by Capsid Structure

                               Capsid Classification                                                        Examples

       Naked icosahedral                                                             Hepatitis A virus, polioviruses

                                                                                     Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex virus, rubella
       Enveloped icosahedral
                                                                                     virus, yellow fever virus, HIV-1

                                                                                     Influenza viruses, mumps virus, measles virus,
       Enveloped helical
                                                                                     rabies virus

       Naked helical                                                                 Tobacco mosaic virus

       Complex with many proteins; some have combinations of                         Herpesviruses, smallpox virus, hepatitis B virus,
       icosahedral and helical capsid structures                                     T4 bacteriophage

      TABLE 21.2




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      21.1 • Viral Evolution, Morphology, and Classification       543




FIGURE 21.7 Transmission electron micrographs of various viruses show their capsid structures. The capsid of the (a) polio virus is naked
icosahedral; (b) the Epstein-Barr virus capsid is enveloped icosahedral; (c) the mumps virus capsid is an enveloped helix; (d) the tobacco
mosaic virus capsid is naked helical; and (e) the herpesvirus capsid is complex. (credit a: modification of work by Dr. Fred Murphy, Sylvia
Whitfield; credit b: modification of work by Liza Gross; credit c: modification of work by Dr. F. A. Murphy, CDC; credit d: modification of work
by USDA ARS; credit e: modification of work by Linda Stannard, Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Cape Town, South Africa,
NASA; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

Baltimore Classification
The most commonly and currently used system of virus classification was first developed by Nobel Prize-winning
biologist David Baltimore in the early 1970s. In addition to the differences in morphology and genetics mentioned
above, the Baltimore classification scheme groups viruses according to how the mRNA is produced during the
replicative cycle of the virus.

Group I viruses contain double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) as their genome. Their mRNA is produced by transcription in
much the same way as with cellular DNA, using the enzymes of the host cell.

Group II viruses have single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) as their genome. They convert their single-stranded genomes
into a dsDNA intermediate before transcription to mRNA can occur.

Group III viruses use dsRNA as their genome. The strands separate, and one of them is used as a template for the
generation of mRNA using the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase encoded by the virus.

Group IV viruses have ssRNA as their genome with a positive polarity, which means that the genomic RNA can serve
directly as mRNA. Intermediates of dsRNA, called replicative intermediates, are made in the process of copying
the genomic RNA. Multiple, full-length RNA strands of negative polarity (complementary to the positive-stranded
genomic RNA) are formed from these intermediates, which may then serve as templates for the production of RNA
with positive polarity, including both full-length genomic RNA and shorter viral mRNAs.

Group V viruses contain ssRNA genomes with a negative polarity, meaning that their sequence is complementary
to the mRNA. As with Group IV viruses, dsRNA intermediates are used to make copies of the genome and produce
mRNA. In this case, the negative-stranded genome can be converted directly to mRNA. Additionally, full-length
positive RNA strands are made to serve as templates for the production of the negative-stranded genome.

Group VI viruses have diploid (two copies) ssRNA genomes that must be converted, using the enzyme reverse
transcriptase, to dsDNA; the dsDNA is then transported to the nucleus of the host cell and inserted into the host
genome. Then, mRNA can be produced by transcription of the viral DNA that was integrated into the host genome.

Group VII viruses have partial dsDNA genomes and make ssRNA intermediates that act as mRNA, but are also
544   21 • Viruses



      converted back into dsDNA genomes by reverse transcriptase, necessary for genome replication.

      The characteristics of each group in the Baltimore classification are summarized in Table 21.3 with examples of
      each group.

                                                      Baltimore Classification

       Group          Characteristics                   Mode of mRNA Production                                Example

                     Double-stranded                                                                      Herpes simplex
       I                                mRNA is transcribed directly from the DNA template
                     DNA                                                                                  (herpesvirus)

                     Single-stranded    DNA is converted to double-stranded form before RNA is            Canine parvovirus
       II
                     DNA                transcribed                                                       (parvovirus)

                                                                                                          Childhood
                     Double-stranded
       III                              mRNA is transcribed from the RNA genome                           gastroenteritis
                     RNA
                                                                                                          (rotavirus)

                     Single stranded                                                                      Common cold
       IV                               Genome functions as mRNA
                     RNA (+)                                                                              (picornavirus)

                     Single stranded                                                                      Rabies
       V                                mRNA is transcribed from the RNA genome
                     RNA (-)                                                                              (rhabdovirus)

                     Single stranded
                                        Reverse transcriptase makes DNA from the RNA genome;              Human
                     RNA viruses with
       VI                               DNA is then incorporated in the host genome; mRNA is              immunodeficiency
                     reverse
                                        transcribed from the incorporated DNA                             virus (HIV)
                     transcriptase

                     Double stranded
                                        The viral genome is double-stranded DNA, but viral DNA is
                     DNA viruses with                                                                     Hepatitis B virus
       VII                              replicated through an RNA intermediate; the RNA may
                     reverse                                                                              (hepadnavirus)
                                        serve directly as mRNA or as a template to make mRNA
                     transcriptase

      TABLE 21.3

      21.2 Virus Infections and Hosts
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • List the steps of replication and explain what occurs at each step
         • Describe the lytic and lysogenic cycles of virus replication
         • Explain the transmission of plant and animal viruses
         • Discuss some of the diseases caused by plant and animal viruses
         • Discuss the economic impact of plant and animal viruses

      Viruses are obligate, intracellular parasites. A virus must first recognize and attach to a specific living cell prior to
      entering it. After penetration, the invading virus must copy its genome and manufacture its own proteins. Finally, the
      progeny virions must escape the host cell so that they can infect other cells. Viruses can infect only certain species
      of hosts and only certain cells within that host. Specific host cells that a virus must occupy and use to replicate are
      called permissive. In most cases, the molecular basis for this specificity is due to a particular surface molecule
      known as the viral receptor on the host cell surface. A specific viral receptor is required for the virus to attach. In
      addition, differences in metabolism and host-cell immune responses (based on differential gene expression) are a
      likely factor in determining which cells a virus may target for replication.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          21.2 • Virus Infections and Hosts   545



Steps of Virus Infections
A virus must use its host-cell processes to replicate. The viral replication cycle can produce dramatic biochemical
and structural changes in the host cell, which may cause cell damage. These changes, called cytopathic effects,
can change cell functions or even destroy the cell. Some infected cells, such as those infected by the common cold
virus known as rhinovirus, die through lysis (bursting) or apoptosis (programmed cell death or “cell suicide”),
releasing all progeny virions at once. The symptoms of viral diseases result both from such cell damage caused by
the virus and from the immune response to the virus, which attempts to control and eliminate the virus from the
body.

Many animal viruses, such as HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), leave the infected cells of the immune system
by a process known as budding, where virions leave the cell individually. During the budding process, the cell does
not undergo lysis and is not immediately killed. However, the damage to the cells that the virus infects may make it
impossible for the cells to function normally, even though the cells remain alive for a period of time. Most productive
viral infections follow similar steps in the virus replication cycle: attachment, penetration, uncoating, replication,
assembly, and release (Figure 21.8).

Attachment
A virus attaches to a specific receptor site on the host cell membrane through attachment proteins in the capsid or
via glycoproteins embedded in the viral envelope. The specificity of this interaction determines the host—and the
cells within the host—that can be infected by a particular virus. This can be illustrated by thinking of several keys and
several locks, where each key will fit only one specific lock.

    LINK TO LEARNING
This video (https://openstax.org/l/influenza) explains how influenza attacks the body.


Entry
Viruses may enter a host cell either with or without the viral capsid. The nucleic acid of bacteriophages enters the
host cell “naked,” leaving the capsid outside the cell. Plant and animal viruses can enter through endocytosis (as
you may recall, the cell membrane surrounds and engulfs the entire virus). Some enveloped viruses enter the cell
when the viral envelope fuses directly with the cell membrane. Once inside the cell, the viral capsid degrades, and
then the viral nucleic acid is released and becomes available for replication and transcription.

Replication and Assembly
The replication mechanism depends on the viral genome. DNA viruses usually use host-cell proteins and enzymes to
replicate the viral DNA and to transcribe viral mRNA, which is then used to direct viral protein synthesis. RNA viruses
usually use the RNA core as a template for synthesis of viral genomic RNA and mRNA. The viral mRNA directs the
host cell to synthesize viral enzymes and capsid proteins, and assemble new virions.

Of course, there are exceptions to this pattern. If a host cell does not provide the enzymes necessary for viral
replication, viral genes supply the information to direct synthesis of the missing proteins. Retroviruses, such as HIV
(group VI of the Baltimore classification scheme), have an RNA genome that must be reverse transcribed into DNA,
which then is incorporated into the host cell genome. To convert RNA into DNA, retroviruses must contain genes that
encode the virus-specific enzyme reverse transcriptase that transcribes an RNA template to DNA. Reverse
transcription never occurs in uninfected host cells—the enzyme reverse transcriptase is only derived from the
expression of viral genes within the infected host cells. The fact that HIV produces some of its own enzymes not
found in the host has allowed researchers to develop drugs that inhibit these enzymes without affecting the host’s
metabolism.

This approach has led to the development of a variety of drugs used to treat HIV and has been effective at reducing
the number of infectious virions (copies of viral RNA) in the blood to non-detectable levels in many HIV-infected
individuals.

Egress
The last stage of viral replication is the release of the new virions produced in the host organism, where they are
546   21 • Viruses



      able to infect adjacent cells and repeat the replication cycle. As you’ve learned, some viruses are released when the
      host cell dies, and other viruses can leave infected cells by budding through the membrane without directly killing
      the cell.



              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 21.8 The influenza reproductive cycle. In influenza virus infection, glycoproteins on the capsid attach to a host epithelial cell.
      Following this, the virus is engulfed. RNA and proteins are then made and assembled into new virions.

      Influenza virus is packaged in a viral envelope that fuses with the plasma membrane. This way, the virus can exit the
      host cell without killing it. What advantage does the virus gain by keeping the host cell alive?


           LINK TO LEARNING
      Watch a video (https://openstax.org/l/viruses) on viruses, identifying structures, modes of transmission, replication,
      and more.


      Different Hosts and Their Viruses
      As you’ve learned, viruses often infect very specific hosts, as well as specific cells within the host. This feature of a
      virus makes it specific to one or a few species of life on Earth. On the other hand, so many different types of viruses
      exist on Earth that nearly every living organism has its own set of viruses trying to infect its cells. Even prokaryotes,
      the smallest and simplest of cells, may be attacked by specific types of viruses. In the following section, we will look
      at some of the features of viral infection of prokaryotic cells. As we have learned, viruses that infect bacteria are
      called bacteriophages (Figure 21.9). Archaea have their own similar viruses.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        21.2 • Virus Infections and Hosts   547



Bacteriophages




FIGURE 21.9 Bacteriophages attached to a host cell (transmission electron micrograph). In bacteriophage with tails, like the one shown
here, the tails serve as a passageway for transmission of the phage genome. (credit: modification of work by Dr. Graham Beards; scale-bar
data from Matt Russell)

Most bacteriophages are dsDNA viruses, which use host enzymes for DNA replication and RNA transcription. Phage
particles must bind to specific surface receptors and actively insert the genome into the host cell. (The complex tail
structures seen in many bacteriophages are actively involved in getting the viral genome across the prokaryotic cell
wall.) When infection of a cell by a bacteriophage results in the production of new virions, the infection is said to be
productive. If the virions are released by bursting the cell, the virus replicates by means of a lytic cycle (Figure
21.10). An example of a lytic bacteriophage is T4, which infects Escherichia coli found in the human intestinal tract.
Sometimes, however, a virus can remain within the cell without being released. For example, when a temperate
bacteriophage infects a bacterial cell, it replicates by means of a lysogenic cycle (Figure 21.10), and the viral
genome is incorporated into the genome of the host cell. When the phage DNA is incorporated into the host-cell
genome, it is called a prophage. An example of a lysogenic bacteriophage is the λ (lambda) virus, which also infects
the E. coli bacterium. Viruses that infect plant or animal cells may sometimes undergo infections where they are not
producing virions for long periods. An example is the animal herpesviruses, including herpes simplex viruses, the
cause of oral and genital herpes in humans. In a process called latency, these viruses can exist in nervous tissue for
long periods of time without producing new virions, only to leave latency periodically and cause lesions in the skin
where the virus replicates. Even though there are similarities between lysogeny and latency, the term lysogenic
cycle is usually reserved to describe bacteriophages. Latency will be described in more detail in the next section.
548   21 • Viruses




              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 21.10 A temperate bacteriophage has both lytic and lysogenic cycles. In the lytic cycle, the phage replicates and lyses the host
      cell. In the lysogenic cycle, phage DNA is incorporated into the host genome, where it is passed on to subsequent generations.
      Environmental stressors such as starvation or exposure to toxic chemicals may cause the prophage to excise and enter the lytic cycle.

      Which of the following statements is false?

        a.   In the lytic cycle, new phages are produced and released into the environment.
        b.   In the lysogenic cycle, phage DNA is incorporated into the host genome.
        c.   An environmental stressor can cause the phage to initiate the lysogenic cycle.
        d.   Cell lysis only occurs in the lytic cycle.


      Plant Viruses
      Most plant viruses, like the tobacco mosaic virus, have single-stranded (+) RNA genomes. However, there are also
      plant viruses in most other virus categories. Unlike bacteriophages, plant viruses do not have active mechanisms for
      delivering the viral genome across the protective cell wall. For a plant virus to enter a new host plant, some type of
      mechanical damage must occur. This damage is often caused by weather, insects, animals, fire, or human activities
      like farming or landscaping. Movement from cell to cell within a plant can be facilitated by viral modification of
      plasmodesmata (cytoplasmic threads that pass from one plant cell to the next). Additionally, plant offspring may
      inherit viral diseases from parent plants. Plant viruses can be transmitted by a variety of vectors, through contact
      with an infected plant’s sap, by living organisms such as insects and nematodes, and through pollen. The transfer of
      a virus from one plant to another is known as horizontal transmission, whereas the inheritance of a virus from a
      parent is called vertical transmission.

      Symptoms of viral diseases vary according to the virus and its host (Table 21.4). One common symptom is
      hyperplasia, the abnormal proliferation of cells that causes the appearance of plant tumors known as galls. Other
      viruses induce hypoplasia, or decreased cell growth, in the leaves of plants, causing thin, yellow areas to appear.
      Still other viruses affect the plant by directly killing plant cells, a process known as cell necrosis. Other symptoms of
      plant viruses include malformed leaves; black streaks on the stems of the plants; altered growth of stems, leaves, or
      fruits; and ring spots, which are circular or linear areas of discoloration found in a leaf.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            21.2 • Virus Infections and Hosts   549




                                  Some Common Symptoms of Plant Viral Diseases

                      Symptom                                         Appears as

              Hyperplasia                    Galls (tumors)

              Hypoplasia                     Thinned, yellow splotches on leaves

              Cell necrosis                  Dead, blackened stems, leaves, or fruit

              Abnormal growth patterns       Malformed stems, leaves, or fruit

              Discoloration                  Yellow, red, or black lines, or rings in stems, leaves, or fruit

             TABLE 21.4

Plant viruses can seriously disrupt crop growth and development, significantly affecting our food supply. They are
responsible for poor crop quality and quantity globally, and can bring about huge economic losses annually. Others
viruses may damage plants used in landscaping. Some viruses that infect agricultural food plants include the name
of the plant they infect, such as tomato spotted wilt virus, bean common mosaic virus, and cucumber mosaic virus.
In plants used for landscaping, two of the most common viruses are peony ring spot and rose mosaic virus. There
are far too many plant viruses to discuss each in detail, but symptoms of bean common mosaic virus result in
lowered bean production and stunted, unproductive plants. In the ornamental rose, the rose mosaic disease causes
wavy yellow lines and colored splotches on the leaves of the plant.

Animal Viruses
Animal viruses, unlike the viruses of plants and bacteria, do not have to penetrate a cell wall to gain access to the
host cell. The virus may even induce the host cell to cooperate in the infection process. Non-enveloped or “naked”
animal viruses may enter cells in two different ways. As a protein in the viral capsid binds to its receptor on the host
cell, the virus may be taken inside the cell via a vesicle during the normal cell process of receptor-mediated
endocytosis. An alternative method of cell penetration used by non-enveloped viruses is for capsid proteins to
undergo shape changes after binding to the receptor, creating channels in the host cell membrane. The viral genome
is then “injected” into the host cell through these channels in a manner analogous to that used by many
bacteriophages.

Enveloped viruses also have two ways of entering cells after binding to their receptors: receptor-mediated
endocytosis, or fusion. Many enveloped viruses enter the cell by receptor-mediated endocytosis in a fashion similar
to that seen in some non-enveloped viruses. On the other hand, fusion only occurs with enveloped virions. These
viruses, which include HIV among others, use special fusion proteins in their envelopes to cause the envelope to
fuse with the plasma membrane of the cell, thus releasing the genome and capsid of the virus into the cell
cytoplasm.

After making their proteins and copying their genomes, animal viruses complete the assembly of new virions and
exit the cell. As we have already discussed using the example the influenza virus, enveloped animal viruses may bud
from the cell membrane as they assemble themselves, taking a piece of the cell’s plasma membrane in the process.
On the other hand, non-enveloped viral progeny, such as rhinoviruses, accumulate in infected cells until there is a
signal for lysis or apoptosis, and all virions are released together.

As you will learn in the next module, animal viruses are associated with a variety of human diseases. Some of them
follow the classic pattern of acute disease, where symptoms get increasingly worse for a short period followed by
the elimination of the virus from the body by the immune system and eventual recovery from the infection.
Examples of acute viral diseases are the common cold and influenza. Other viruses cause long-term chronic
infections, such as the virus causing hepatitis C, whereas others, like herpes simplex virus, only cause intermittent
symptoms. Still other viruses, such as human herpesviruses 6 and 7, which in some cases can cause the minor
childhood disease roseola, often successfully cause productive infections without causing any symptoms at all in
550   21 • Viruses



      the host, and thus we say these patients have an asymptomatic infection.

      In hepatitis C infections, the virus grows and reproduces in liver cells, causing low levels of liver damage. The
      damage is so low that infected individuals are often unaware that they are infected, and many infections are
      detected only by routine blood work on patients with risk factors such as intravenous drug use. On the other hand,
      since many of the symptoms of viral diseases are caused by immune responses, a lack of symptoms is an indication
      of a weak immune response to the virus. This allows the virus to escape elimination by the immune system and
      persist in individuals for years, all the while producing low levels of progeny virions in what is known as a chronic
      viral disease. Chronic infection of the liver by this virus leads to a much greater chance of developing liver cancer,
      sometimes as much as 30 years after the initial infection.

      As already discussed, herpes simplex virus can remain in a state of latency in nervous tissue for months, even years.
      As the virus “hides” in the tissue and makes few if any viral proteins, there is nothing for the immune response to act
      against, and immunity to the virus slowly declines. Under certain conditions, including various types of physical and
      psychological stress, the latent herpes simplex virus may be reactivated and undergo a lytic replication cycle in the
      skin, causing the lesions associated with the disease. Once virions are produced in the skin and viral proteins are
      synthesized, the immune response is again stimulated and resolves the skin lesions in a few days or weeks by
      destroying viruses in the skin. As a result of this type of replicative cycle, appearances of cold sores and genital
      herpes outbreaks only occur intermittently, even though the viruses remain in the nervous tissue for life. Latent
      infections are common with other herpesviruses as well, including the varicella-zoster virus that causes chickenpox.
      After having a chickenpox infection in childhood, the varicella-zoster virus can remain latent for many years and
      reactivate in adults to cause the painful condition known as “shingles” (Figure 21.11).




      FIGURE 21.11 A latent virus infection. (a) Varicella-zoster, the virus that causes chickenpox, has an enveloped icosahedral capsid visible in
      this transmission electron micrograph. Its double-stranded DNA genome becomes incorporated in the host DNA and can reactivate after
      latency in the form of (b) shingles, often exhibiting a rash. (credit a: modification of work by Dr. Erskine Palmer, B. G. Martin, CDC; credit b:
      modification of work by “rosmary”/Flickr; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

      Some animal-infecting viruses, including the hepatitis C virus discussed above, are known as oncogenic viruses:
      They have the ability to cause cancer. These viruses interfere with the normal regulation of the host cell cycle either
      by introducing genes that stimulate unregulated cell growth (oncogenes) or by interfering with the expression of
      genes that inhibit cell growth. Oncogenic viruses can be either DNA or RNA viruses. Cancers known to be associated
      with viral infections include cervical cancer, caused by human papillomavirus (HPV) (Figure 21.12), liver cancer
      caused by hepatitis C virus, T-cell leukemia, and several types of lymphoma.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    21.3 • Prevention and Treatment of Viral Infections     551




FIGURE 21.12 HPV, or human papillomavirus, has a naked icosahedral capsid visible in this transmission electron micrograph and a
double-stranded DNA genome that is incorporated into the host DNA. The virus, which is sexually transmitted, is oncogenic and can lead to
cervical cancer. (credit: modification of work by NCI, NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)


     LINK TO LEARNING
This video (https://openstax.org/l/animal_viruses) shows the life cycle of a virus.


21.3 Prevention and Treatment of Viral Infections
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Identify major viral illnesses that affect humans
   • Compare vaccinations and anti-viral drugs as medical approaches to viruses

Viruses cause a variety of diseases in animals, including humans, ranging from the common cold to potentially fatal
illnesses like meningitis (Figure 21.13). These diseases can be treated by antiviral drugs or by vaccines; however,
some viruses, such as HIV, are capable both of avoiding the immune response and of mutating within the host
organism to become resistant to antiviral drugs.
552   21 • Viruses




      FIGURE 21.13 A sampling of human viruses. Viruses can cause dozens of ailments in humans, ranging from mild illnesses to serious
      diseases. (credit: modification of work by Mikael Häggström)

      Vaccines for Prevention
      The primary method of controlling viral disease is by vaccination, which is intended to prevent outbreaks by
      building immunity to a virus or virus family (Figure 21.14). Vaccines may be prepared using live viruses, killed
      viruses, or molecular subunits of the virus. Note that the killed viral vaccines and subunit viruses are both incapable
      of causing disease, nor is there any valid evidence that vaccinations contribute to autism.

      Live viral vaccines are designed in the laboratory to cause few symptoms in recipients while giving them protective
      immunity against future infections. Polio was one disease that represented a milestone in the use of vaccines. Polio
      epidemics occurred with increasing frequency and impact as the twentieth century progressed, becoming a
      terrifying and tragic event each summer. Tens of thousands of people died and many more were paralyzed; children
      made up a large portion of the victims. Using killed virus tested on HeLa cell line (originally obtained from Henrietta
      Lacks and then mass produced to meet the need), Jonas Salk developed a successful vaccine. Mass immunization
      campaigns in the 1950s (killed vaccine) and 1960s (live vaccine) significantly reduced the incidence of the disease.
      The success of the polio vaccine paved the way for the routine dispensation of childhood vaccines against measles,
      mumps, rubella, chickenpox, and other diseases.

      The issue with using live vaccines (which are usually more effective than killed vaccines), is the low but significant
      danger that these viruses will revert to their disease-causing form by back mutations. Live vaccines are usually
      made by attenuating (weakening) the “wild-type” (disease-causing) virus by growing it in the laboratory in tissues
      or at temperatures different from what the virus is accustomed to in the host. Adaptations to these new cells or
      temperatures induce mutations in the genomes of the virus, allowing it to grow better in the laboratory while
      inhibiting its ability to cause disease when reintroduced into conditions found in the host. These attenuated viruses
      thus still cause infection, but they do not grow very well, allowing the immune response to develop in time to
      prevent major disease. Back mutations occur when the vaccine undergoes mutations in the host such that it
      readapts to the host and can again cause disease, which can then be spread to other humans in an epidemic. This
      type of scenario happened as recently as 2007 in Nigeria where mutations in a polio vaccine led to an epidemic of
      polio in that country.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   21.3 • Prevention and Treatment of Viral Infections   553



Some vaccines are in continuous development because certain viruses, such as influenza and HIV, have a high
mutation rate compared to that of other viruses and normal host cells. With influenza, mutations in the surface
molecules of the virus help the organism evade the protective immunity that may have been obtained in a previous
influenza season, making it necessary for individuals to get vaccinated every year. Other viruses, such as those that
cause the childhood diseases measles, mumps, and rubella, mutate so infrequently that the same vaccine is used
year after year.




           FIGURE 21.14 Vaccinations are designed to boost immunity to a virus to prevent infection. (credit: Navy Medicine)


    LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this NOVA video (https://openstax.org/l/1918_flu) to learn how microbiologists are attempting to replicate
the deadly 1918 Spanish influenza virus so they can understand more about virology.


Vaccines and Antiviral Drugs for Treatment
In some cases, vaccines can be used to treat an active viral infection. The concept behind this is that by giving the
vaccine, immunity is boosted without adding more disease-causing virus. In the case of rabies, a fatal neurological
disease transmitted via the saliva of rabies virus-infected animals, the progression of the disease from the time of
the animal bite to the time it enters the central nervous system may be two weeks or longer. This is enough time to
vaccinate individuals who suspect that they have been bitten by a rabid animal, and their boosted immune response
is sufficient to prevent the virus from entering nervous tissue. Thus, the potentially fatal neurological consequences
of the disease are averted, and the individual only has to recover from the infected bite. This approach is also being
used for the treatment of Ebola, one of the fastest and most deadly viruses on Earth. Transmitted by bats and great
apes, this disease can cause death in 70 to 90 percent of infected humans within two weeks. Using newly developed
vaccines that boost the immune response in this way, there is hope that affected individuals will be better able to
control the virus, potentially saving a greater percentage of infected persons from a rapid and very painful death.

Another way of treating viral infections is the use of antiviral drugs. Because viruses use the resources of the host
cell for replication and the production of new virus proteins, it is difficult to block their activities without damaging
the host. For many years, scientists thought that drugs capable of impacting viruses would be too toxic for the body
to endure. To meet this challenge, researcher Gertrude Elion sought to develop drugs that would target only the
554   21 • Viruses



      virus through processes such as inhibiting only viral DNA replication. For example, some of her medicines focused
      on purines, while others affected DNA polymerase. (Elion has 45 patents ranging from antivirals to
      immunosuppressants to cancer drugs.) However, we do have some effective antiviral drugs, such as those used to
      treat HIV and influenza. Some antiviral drugs are specific for a particular virus and others have been used to control
      and reduce symptoms for a wide variety of viral diseases. For most viruses, antiviral drugs can inhibit the virus by
      blocking the actions of one or more of its proteins. It is important to note that the targeted proteins be encoded by
      viral genes and that these molecules are not present in a healthy host cell. In this way, viral growth is inhibited
      without damaging the host. Elion's work with George Hitchens not only led to direct treatments, but, more
      importantly, changed the entire methodology of drug development. By targeting specific aspects of tumor cells,
      viruses, and bacteria, they laid the groundwork for many of today's most common and important medicines, used to
      help millions of people each year. They were awarded the Nobel Prize in 1988.

      Antivirals have been developed to treat genital herpes (herpes simplex II) and influenza. For genital herpes, drugs
      such as acyclovir, developed by Elion, can reduce the number and duration of episodes of active viral disease, during
      which patients develop viral lesions in their skin cells. As the virus remains latent in nervous tissue of the body for
      life, this drug is not curative but can make the symptoms of the disease more manageable. For influenza, drugs like
      Tamiflu (oseltamivir) (Figure 21.15) can reduce the duration of “flu” symptoms by one or two days, but the drug
      does not prevent symptoms entirely. Tamiflu works by inhibiting an enzyme (viral neuraminidase) that allows new
      virions to leave their infected cells. Thus, Tamiflu inhibits the spread of virus from infected to uninfected cells. Other
      antiviral drugs, such as Ribavirin, have been used to treat a variety of viral infections, although its mechanism of
      action against certain viruses remains unclear.




      FIGURE 21.15 Action of an antiviral drug. (a) Tamiflu inhibits a viral enzyme called neuraminidase (NA) found in the influenza viral
      envelope. (b) Neuraminidase cleaves the connection between viral hemagglutinin (HA), also found in the viral envelope, and glycoproteins
      on the host cell surface. Inhibition of neuraminidase prevents the virus from detaching from the host cell, thereby blocking further infection.
      (credit a: modification of work by M. Eickmann)

      By far, the most successful use of antivirals has been in the treatment of the retrovirus HIV, which causes a disease
      that, if untreated, is usually fatal within 10 to 12 years after infection. Anti-HIV drugs have been able to control viral
      replication to the point that individuals receiving these drugs survive for a significantly longer time than the
      untreated.

      A particular challenge with HIV is its tendency to mutate quickly within the body of an individual patient. This leads
      to individual drug resistance, and requires a different treatment strategy than many other diseases. David Ho was
      among the first to propose and develop a method to treat multiple mutations of HIV at the same time. Ho's efforts
      were a turning point in fighting AIDS. Anti-HIV drugs inhibit viral replication at many different phases of the HIV
      replicative cycle (Figure 21.16). Drugs have been developed that inhibit the fusion of the HIV viral envelope with the
      plasma membrane of the host cell (fusion inhibitors), the conversion of its RNA genome into double-stranded DNA
      (reverse transcriptase inhibitors, like AZT), the integration of the viral DNA into the host genome (integrase
      inhibitors), and the processing of viral proteins (protease inhibitors).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    21.3 • Prevention and Treatment of Viral Infections   555




FIGURE 21.16 Life cycle of HIV. HIV, an enveloped, icosahedral virus, attaches to the CD4 receptor of an immune cell and fuses with the
cell membrane. Viral contents are released into the cell, where viral enzymes convert the single-stranded RNA genome into DNA and
incorporate it into the host genome. (credit: NIAID, NIH)

Unfortunately, when any of these drugs are used individually, the high mutation rate of the virus allows it to easily
and rapidly develop resistance to the drug, limiting the drug’s effectiveness. The breakthrough in the treatment of
HIV was the development of HAART, highly active anti-retroviral therapy, which involves a mixture of different drugs,
sometimes called a drug “cocktail.” By attacking the virus at different stages of its replicative cycle, it is much more
difficult for the virus to develop resistance to multiple drugs at the same time. Still, even with the use of combination
HAART therapy, there is concern that, over time, the virus will develop resistance to this therapy. Thus, new anti-HIV
drugs are constantly being developed with the hope of continuing the battle against this highly fatal virus.


  EVERYDAY CONNECTION
  Applied Virology
  The study of viruses has led to the development of a variety of new ways to treat non-viral diseases. Viruses
556   21 • Viruses



        have been used in gene therapy. Gene therapy is used to treat genetic diseases such as severe combined
        immunodeficiency (SCID), a heritable, recessive disease in which children are born with severely compromised
        immune systems. One common type of SCID is due to the lack of an enzyme, adenosine deaminase (ADA), which
        breaks down purine bases. To treat this disease by gene therapy, bone marrow cells are taken from a SCID
        patient and the ADA gene is inserted. This is where viruses come in, and their use relies on their ability to
        penetrate living cells and bring genes in with them. Viruses such as adenovirus, an upper-respiratory human
        virus, are modified by the addition of the ADA gene, and the virus then transports this gene into the cell. The
        modified cells, now capable of making ADA, are then given back to the patients in the hope of curing them. Gene
        therapy using viruses as carriers of genes (viral vectors), although still experimental, holds promise for the
        treatment of many genetic diseases. Still, many technological problems need to be solved for this approach to
        be a viable method for treating genetic disease.

        Another medical use for viruses relies on their specificity and ability to kill the cells they infect. Oncolytic
        viruses are engineered in the laboratory specifically to attack and kill cancer cells. A genetically modified
        adenovirus known as H101 has been used since 2005 in clinical trials in China to treat head and neck cancers.
        The results have been promising, with a greater short-term response rate to the combination of chemotherapy
        and viral therapy than to chemotherapy treatment alone. This ongoing research may herald the beginning of a
        new age of cancer therapy, where viruses are engineered to find and specifically kill cancer cells, regardless of
        where in the body they may have spread.

        A third use of viruses in medicine relies on their specificity and involves using bacteriophages in the treatment of
        bacterial infections. Bacterial diseases have been treated with antibiotics since the 1940s. However, over time,
        many bacteria have evolved resistance to antibiotics. A good example is methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
        aureus (MRSA, pronounced “mersa”), an infection commonly acquired in hospitals. This bacterium is resistant to
        a variety of antibiotics, making it difficult to treat. The use of bacteriophages specific for such bacteria would
        bypass their resistance to antibiotics and specifically kill them. Although phage therapy is in use in the Republic
        of Georgia to treat antibiotic-resistant bacteria, its use to treat human diseases has not been approved in most
        countries. However, the safety of the treatment was confirmed in the United States when the U.S. Food and Drug
        Administration approved spraying meats with bacteriophages to destroy the food pathogen Listeria. As more
        and more antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria evolve, the use of bacteriophages might be a potential solution
        to the problem, and the development of phage therapy is of much interest to researchers worldwide.


      21.4 Other Acellular Entities: Prions and Viroids
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe prions and their basic properties
         • Define viroids and their targets of infection

      Prions and viroids are pathogens (agents with the ability to cause disease) that have simpler structures than viruses
      but, in the case of prions, still can produce deadly diseases.

      Prions
      Prions, so-called because they are proteinaceous, are infectious particles—smaller than viruses—that contain no
      nucleic acids (neither DNA nor RNA). Historically, the idea of an infectious agent that did not use nucleic acids was
      considered impossible, but pioneering work by Nobel Prize-winning biologist Stanley Prusiner has convinced the
      majority of biologists that such agents do indeed exist.

      Fatal neurodegenerative diseases, such as kuru in humans and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in cattle
      (commonly known as “mad cow disease”) were shown to be transmitted by prions. The disease was spread by the
      consumption of meat, nervous tissue, or internal organs between members of the same species. Kuru, native to
      humans in Papua New Guinea, was spread from human to human via ritualistic cannibalism. BSE, originally detected
      in the United Kingdom, was spread between cattle by the practice of including cattle nervous tissue in feed for other
      cattle. Individuals with kuru and BSE show symptoms of loss of motor control and unusual behaviors, such as
      uncontrolled bursts of laughter with kuru, followed by death. Kuru was controlled by inducing the population to



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         21.4 • Other Acellular Entities: Prions and Viroids     557



abandon its ritualistic cannibalism.

On the other hand, BSE was initially thought to only affect cattle. Cattle dying of the disease were shown to have
developed lesions or “holes” in the brain, causing the brain tissue to resemble a sponge. Later on in the outbreak,
however, it was shown that a similar encephalopathy in humans, known as variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD),
could be acquired from eating beef from animals infected with BSE, sparking bans by various countries on the
importation of British beef and causing considerable economic damage to the British beef industry (Figure 21.17).
BSE still exists in various areas, and although a rare disease, individuals that acquire CJD are difficult to treat. The
disease can be spread from human to human by blood, so many countries have banned blood donation from regions
associated with BSE.

The cause of spongiform encephalopathies, such as kuru and BSE, is an infectious structural variant of a normal
cellular protein called PrP (prion protein). It is this variant that constitutes the prion particle. PrP exists in two forms,
PrPc, the normal form of the protein, and PrPsc, the infectious form. Once introduced into the body, the PrPsc
contained within the prion binds to PrPc and converts it to PrPsc. This leads to an exponential increase of the PrPsc
protein, which aggregates. PrPsc is folded abnormally, and the resulting conformation (shape) is directly responsible
for the lesions seen in the brains of infected cattle. Thus, although not without some detractors among scientists,
the prion seems likely to be an entirely new form of infectious agent, the first one found whose transmission is not
reliant upon genes made of DNA or RNA.




FIGURE 21.17 Mad Cow Disease in humans. (a) Endogenous normal prion protein (PrPc) is converted into the disease-causing form (PrPsc)
when it encounters this variant form of the protein. PrPsc may arise spontaneously in brain tissue, especially if a mutant form of the protein
is present, or it may occur via the spread of misfolded prions consumed in food into brain tissue. (b) This prion-infected brain tissue,
visualized using light microscopy, shows the vacuoles that give it a spongy texture, typical of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.
(credit b: modification of work by Dr. Al Jenny, USDA APHIS; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

Viroids
Viroids are plant pathogens: small, single-stranded, circular RNA particles that are much simpler than a virus. They
do not have a capsid or outer envelope, but like viruses can reproduce only within a host cell. Viroids do not,
however, manufacture any proteins, and they only produce a single, specific RNA molecule. Human diseases caused
by viroids have yet to be identified.

Viroids are known to infect plants (Figure 21.18) and are responsible for crop failures and the loss of millions of
dollars in agricultural revenue each year. Some of the plants they infect include potatoes, cucumbers, tomatoes,
chrysanthemums, avocados, and coconut palms.
558   21 • Viruses




      FIGURE 21.18 These potatoes have been infected by the potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTV), which is typically spread when infected knives
      are used to cut healthy potatoes, which are then planted. (credit: Pamela Roberts, University of Florida Institute of Food and Agricultural
      Sciences, USDA ARS)



              CAREER CONNECTION

      Virologist
      Virology is the study of viruses, and a virologist is an individual trained in this discipline. Training in virology can lead
      to many different career paths. Virologists are actively involved in academic research and teaching in colleges and
      medical schools. Some virologists treat patients or are involved in the generation and production of vaccines. They
      might participate in epidemiologic studies (Figure 21.19) or become science writers, to name just a few possible
      careers.




      FIGURE 21.19 This virologist is engaged in fieldwork, sampling eggs from this nest for avian influenza. (credit: Don Becker, USGS EROS,
      U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)

      If you think you may be interested in a career in virology, find a mentor in the field. Many large medical centers have
      departments of virology, and smaller hospitals usually have virology labs within their microbiology departments.
      Volunteer in a virology lab for a semester or work in one over the summer. Discussing the profession and getting a




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           21.4 • Other Acellular Entities: Prions and Viroids   559



first-hand look at the work will help you decide whether a career in virology is right for you. The American Society of
Virology’s website (https://openstax.org/l/asv) is a good resource for information regarding training and careers in
virology.
560   21 • Key Terms




Key Terms
acellular lacking cells                                      period of time but only causes intermittent
acute disease disease where the symptoms rise and            symptoms
   fall within a short period of time                     lysis bursting of a cell
asymptomatic disease disease where there are no           lysogenic cycle type of virus replication in which the
   symptoms and the individual is unaware of being           viral genome is incorporated into the genome of the
   infected unless lab tests are performed                   host cell
attenuation weakening of a virus during vaccine           lytic cycle type of virus replication in which virions
   development                                               are released through lysis, or bursting, of the cell
AZT anti-HIV drug that inhibits the viral enzyme          matrix protein envelope protein that stabilizes the
   reverse transcriptase                                     envelope and often plays a role in the assembly of
back mutation when a live virus vaccine reverts back         progeny virions
   to it disease-causing phenotype                        negative polarity ssRNA viruses with genomes
bacteriophage virus that infects bacteria                    complementary to their mRNA
budding method of exit from the cell used in certain      oncogenic virus virus that has the ability to cause
   animal viruses, where virions leave the cell              cancer
   individually by capturing a piece of the host plasma   oncolytic virus virus engineered to specifically infect
   membrane                                                  and kill cancer cells
capsid protein coating of the viral core                  pathogen agent with the ability to cause disease
capsomere protein subunit that makes up the capsid        permissive cell type that is able to support
cell necrosis cell death                                     productive replication of a virus
chronic infection describes when the virus persists in    phage therapy treatment of bacterial diseases using
   the body for a long period of time                        bacteriophages specific to a particular bacterium
cytopathic causing cell damage                            positive polarity ssRNA virus with a genome that
envelope lipid bilayer that encircles some viruses           contains the same base sequences and codons
fusion method of entry by some enveloped viruses,            found in their mRNA
   where the viral envelope fuses with the plasma         prion infectious particle that consists of proteins that
   membrane of the host cell                                 replicate without DNA or RNA
gall appearance of a plant tumor                          productive viral infection that leads to the production
gene therapy treatment of genetic disease by adding          of new virions
   genes, using viruses to carry the new genes inside     prophage phage DNA that is incorporated into the
   the cell                                                  host cell genome
group I virus virus with a dsDNA genome                   PrPc normal prion protein
group II virus virus with an ssDNA genome                 PrPsc infectious form of a prion protein
group III virus virus with a dsRNA genome                 replicative intermediate dsRNA intermediate made
group IV virus virus with an ssRNA genome with               in the process of copying genomic RNA
   positive polarity                                      reverse transcriptase enzyme found in Baltimore
group V virus virus with an ssRNA genome with                groups VI and VII that converts single-stranded
   negative polarity                                         RNA into double-stranded DNA
group VI virus virus with an ssRNA genome                 vaccine weakened solution of virus components,
   converted into dsDNA by reverse transcriptase             viruses, or other agents that produce an immune
group VII virus virus with a single-stranded mRNA            response
   converted into dsDNA for genome replication            vertical transmission transmission of disease from
horizontal transmission transmission of a disease            parent to offspring
   between unrelated individuals                          viral receptor glycoprotein used to attach a virus to
hyperplasia abnormally high cell growth and division         host cells via molecules on the cell
hypoplasia abnormally low cell growth and division        virion individual virus particle outside a host cell
intermittent symptom symptom that occurs                  viroid plant pathogen that produces only a single,
   periodically                                              specific RNA
latency virus that remains in the body for a long         virus core contains the virus genome




Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          21 • Chapter Summary    561




Chapter Summary
21.1 Viral Evolution, Morphology, and                        animals have the ability to cause cancer by interfering
Classification                                               with the regulation of the host cell cycle.

Viruses are tiny, noncellular entities that usually can be   21.3 Prevention and Treatment of Viral
seen only with an electron microscope. Their genomes         Infections
contain either DNA or RNA—never both—and they
                                                             Viruses cause a variety of diseases in humans. Many of
replicate either by using the replication proteins of a
                                                             these diseases can be prevented by the use of viral
host cell or by using proteins encoded in the viral
                                                             vaccines, which stimulate protective immunity against
genome. Viruses are diverse, infecting archaea,
                                                             the virus without causing major disease. Viral vaccines
bacteria, fungi, plants, and animals. Viruses consist of a
                                                             may also be used in active viral infections, boosting the
nucleic acid core surrounded by a protein capsid with
                                                             ability of the immune system to control or destroy the
or without an outer lipid envelope. The capsid shape,
                                                             virus. A series of antiviral drugs that target enzymes
presence of an envelope, and core composition dictate
                                                             and other protein products of viral genes have been
some elements of the classification of viruses. The
                                                             developed and used with mixed success. Combinations
most commonly used classification method, the
                                                             of anti-HIV drugs have been used to effectively control
Baltimore classification, categorizes viruses based on
                                                             the virus, extending the lifespans of infected
how they produce their mRNA.
                                                             individuals. Viruses have many uses in medicines, such
21.2 Virus Infections and Hosts                              as in the treatment of genetic disorders, cancer, and
                                                             bacterial infections.
Plant viruses may be transmitted either vertically from
parent reproductive cells or horizontally through            21.4 Other Acellular Entities: Prions and
damaged plant tissues. Viruses of plants are                 Viroids
responsible for significant economic damage in both
                                                             Prions are infectious agents that consist of protein, but
crop plants and plants used for ornamentation. Animal
                                                             no DNA or RNA, and seem to produce their deadly
viruses enter their hosts through several types of virus-
                                                             effects by duplicating their shapes and accumulating in
host cell interactions and cause a variety of infections.
                                                             tissues. They are thought to contribute to several
Viral infections can be either acute, with a brief period
                                                             progressive brain disorders, including mad cow disease
of infection terminated by host immune responses, or
                                                             and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Viroids are single-
chronic, in which the infection persists. Persistent
                                                             stranded RNA pathogens that infect plants. Their
infections may cause chronic symptoms (hepatitis C),
                                                             presence can have a severe impact on the agriculture
intermittent symptoms (latent viruses such a herpes
                                                             industry.
simplex virus 1), or even be effectively asymptomatic
(human herpesviruses 6 and 7). Oncogenic viruses in

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 21.5 Which of the following statements                killing it. What advantage does the virus gain by
      about virus structure is true?                               keeping the host cell alive?
        a. All viruses are encased in a viral
                                                                3. Figure 21.10 Which of the following statements
            membrane.
                                                                   is false?
        b. The capsomere is made up of small
                                                                      a. In the lytic cycle, new phages are
            protein subunits called capsids.
                                                                          produced and released into the
        c. DNA is the genetic material in all viruses.
                                                                          environment.
        d. Glycoproteins help the virus attach to the
                                                                      b. In the lysogenic cycle, phage DNA is
            host cell.
                                                                          incorporated into the host genome.
                                                                      c. An environmental stressor can cause the
   2. Figure 21.8 Influenza virus is packaged in a viral
                                                                          phage to initiate the lysogenic cycle.
      envelope that fuses with the plasma membrane.
                                                                      d. Cell lysis only occurs in the lytic cycle.
      This way, the virus can exit the host cell without

Review Questions
   4. Which statement is true?                                        a. A virion contains DNA and RNA.
562   21 • Review Questions



         b. Viruses are acellular.                                   produce enzymes and proteins.
         c. Viruses replicate outside of the cell.
         d. Most viruses are easily visualized with a     11. Which statement is true of reverse
            light microscope.                                 transcriptase?
                                                                a. It is a nucleic acid.
   5. The viral ________ play(s) a role in attaching a          b. It infects cells.
      virion to the host cell.                                   c. It transcribes RNA to make DNA.
         a. core                                                d. It is a lipid.
         b. capsid
         c. envelope                                      12. Oncogenic virus cores can be_______.
         d. both b and c                                       a. RNA
                                                               b. DNA
   6. Viruses_______.                                           c. neither RNA nor DNA
        a. all have a round shape                              d. either RNA or DNA
        b. cannot have a long shape
        c. do not maintain any shape                      13. Which is true of DNA viruses?
        d. vary in shape                                       a. They use the host cell’s machinery to
                                                                   produce new copies of their genome.
   7. The observation that the bacteria genus                  b. They all have envelopes.
      Chlamydia contains species that can only survive         c. They are the only kind of viruses that can
      as intracellular parasites supports which viral              cause cancer.
      origin hypothesis?                                       d. They are not important plant pathogens.
        a. Progressive
        b. Regressive                                     14. A bacteriophage can infect ________.
        c. Self-replicating                                     a. the lungs
        d. Virus-first                                          b. viruses
                                                                c. prions
   8. A scientist discovers a new virus with a linear,          d. bacteria
      RNA genome surrounded by a helical capsid.
      The virus is most likely a member of which          15. People with the CCR5Δ32 mutation of a T-cell
      family based on structure classification?               surface protein can be exposed to some strains
        a. Rabies virus                                       of HIV-1 without becoming sick. What step of
        b. Herpesviruses                                      the virus life cycle is likely to be inhibited with
        c. Retroviruses                                       this mutation?
        d. Influenza viruses                                    a. Release
                                                                b. Reverse transcription
   9. Which statement is not true of viral replication?          c. Uncoating
       a. A lysogenic cycle kills the host cell.                d. Attachment
       b. There are six basic steps in the viral
           replication cycle.                             16. An apple grower notices that several of his apple
       c. Viral replication does not affect host cell         trees with fungi growing on their trunks have
           function.                                          developed necrotic ring spots, while other trees
       d. Newly released virions can infect adjacent          in the orchard that lack fungi appear healthy.
           cells.                                             What is the most likely conclusion the farmer
                                                              can make about the virus infecting his apple
  10. Which statement is true of viral replication?           trees?
       a. In the process of apoptosis, the cell                  a. The apple trees were infected by
           survives.                                                 horizontal transmission.
       b. During attachment, the virus attaches at               b. The fungi carry disease.
           specific sites on the cell surface.                   c. The fungi attract disease-carrying insects.
       c. The viral capsid helps the host cell                  d. The apple trees were infected by vertical
           produce more copies of the viral genome.                  transmission.
       d. mRNA works outside of the host cell to



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               21 • Critical Thinking Questions   563



 17. Which of the following is NOT used to treat                 a.   Rabies virus
     active viral disease?                                       b.   Picornavirus
       a. Vaccines                                               c.   HIV-1
       b. Antiviral drugs                                        d.   Influenza A virus
       c. Antibiotics
       d. Phage therapy                                    20. Which of the following is not associated with
                                                               prions?
 18. Vaccines_______.                                            a. Replicating shapes
       a. are similar to viroids                                 b. Mad cow disease
       b. are only needed once                                   c. DNA
       c. kill viruses                                           d. Toxic proteins
       d. stimulate an immune response
                                                           21. Which statement is true of viroids?
 19. A patient presents at the clinic with an acute             a. They are single-stranded RNA particles.
     viral infection. Assays that analyze the viral life        b. They reproduce only outside of the cell.
     cycle classify the virus into Group V with a               c. They produce proteins.
     segmented genome. Which virus is the most                  d. They affect both plants and animals.
     likely diagnosis for the patient?

Critical Thinking Questions
 22. The first electron micrograph of a virus (tobacco     29. A bacteriophage with a lytic life cycle develops a
     mosaic virus) was produced in 1939. Before that           mutation that allows it to now also go through
     time, how did scientists know that viruses                the lysogenic cycle. How would this provide an
     existed if they could not see them? (Hint: Early          evolutionary advantage over the other
     scientists called viruses “filterable agents.”)           bacteriophages that can only spread through
                                                               lytic cycles?
 23. Varicella-zoster virus is a double-stranded DNA
     virus that causes chickenpox. How does its            30. Why is immunization after being bitten by a rabid
     genome structure provide an evolutionary                  animal so effective and why aren’t people
     advantage over a single-stranded DNA virus?               vaccinated for rabies like dogs and cats are?

 24. Classify the Rabies virus (a rhabdovirus family       31. The vaccine Gardasil that targets human
     member) and HIV-1 with both the Baltimore and             papilloma virus (HPV), the etiological agent of
     genomic structure systems. Compare your                   genital warts, was developed after the anti-HPV
     results. What conclusions can be made about               medication podofilox. Why would doctors still
     these two different methods?                              want a vaccine created after anti-viral
                                                               medications were available?
 25. Why can’t dogs catch the measles?
                                                           32. Prions are responsible for variant Creutzfeldt-
 26. One of the first and most important targets for
                                                               Jakob Disease, which has resulted in over 100
     drugs to fight infection with HIV (a retrovirus) is
                                                               human deaths in Great Britain during the last 10
     the reverse transcriptase enzyme. Why?
                                                               years. How do humans contract this disease?
 27. In this section, you were introduced to different
                                                           33. How are viroids like viruses?
     types of viruses and viral diseases. Briefly
     discuss the most interesting or surprising thing      34. A botanist notices that a tomato plant looks
     you learned about viruses.                                diseased. How could the botanist confirm that
                                                               the agent causing disease is a viroid, and not a
 28. Although plant viruses cannot infect humans,
                                                               virus?
     what are some of the ways in which they affect
     humans?
564   21 • Critical Thinking Questions




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 22
Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea




FIGURE 22.1 Certain prokaryotes can live in extreme environments such as the Morning Glory pool, a hot spring in
Yellowstone National Park. The spring’s vivid blue color is from the prokaryotes that thrive in its very hot waters.
(credit: modification of work by Jon Sullivan)


CHAPTER OUTLINE
22.1 Prokaryotic Diversity
22.2 Structure of Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
22.3 Prokaryotic Metabolism
22.4 Bacterial Diseases in Humans
22.5 Beneficial Prokaryotes


INTRODUCTION In the recent past, scientists grouped living things into six kingdoms—animalia,
plantae, fungi, protista, archea, and bacteria—based on several criteria, such as the absence or
presence of a nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles, the absence or presence of cell
walls, multicellularity, and so on. In the late 20th century, the pioneering work of Carl Woese and
others compared sequences of small-subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA), which resulted in a
more fundamental way to group organisms on Earth. Based on differences in the structure of cell
membranes and in rRNA, Woese and his colleagues proposed that all life on Earth evolved along
three lineages, called domains. The domain Bacteria comprises all organisms in the kingdom
Bacteria, the domain Archaea comprises the rest of the prokaryotes, and the domain Eukarya
comprises all eukaryotes—including organisms in the kingdoms Animalia, Plantae, Fungi, and
Protista.

Two of the three domains—Bacteria and Archaea—are prokaryotic. Prokaryotes were the first
inhabitants on Earth, appearing 3.5 to 3.8 billion years ago. These organisms are abundant and
ubiquitous; that is, they are present everywhere. In addition to inhabiting moderate environments,
they are found in extreme conditions: from boiling springs to permanently frozen environments in
Antarctica; from salty environments like the Dead Sea to environments under tremendous
pressure, such as the depths of the ocean; and from areas without oxygen, such as a waste
management plant, to radioactively contaminated regions, such as Chernobyl. Prokaryotes reside
in the human digestive system and on the skin, are responsible for certain illnesses, and serve an
important role in the preparation of many foods.
566   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea




      22.1 Prokaryotic Diversity
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe the evolutionary history of prokaryotes
         • Discuss the distinguishing features of extremophiles
         • Explain why it is difficult to culture prokaryotes

      Prokaryotes are ubiquitous. They cover every imaginable surface where there is sufficient
      moisture, and they also live on and inside virtually all other living things. In the typical human
      body, prokaryotic cells outnumber human body cells by about ten to one. They comprise the
      majority of living things in all ecosystems. Some prokaryotes thrive in environments that are
      inhospitable for most living things. Prokaryotes recycle nutrients—essential substances (such as
      carbon and nitrogen)—and they drive the evolution of new ecosystems, some of which are natural
      and others man-made. Prokaryotes have been on Earth since long before multicellular life
      appeared. Indeed, eukaryotic cells are thought to be the descendants of ancient prokaryotic
      communities.

      Prokaryotes, the First Inhabitants of Earth
      When and where did cellular life begin? What were the conditions on Earth when life began? We
      now know that prokaryotes were likely the first forms of cellular life on Earth, and they existed for
      billions of years before plants and animals appeared. The Earth and its moon are dated at about
      4.54 billion years in age. This estimate is based on evidence from radiometric dating of meteorite
      material together with other substrate material from Earth and the moon. Early Earth had a very
      different atmosphere (contained less molecular oxygen) than it does today and was subjected to
      strong solar radiation; thus, the first organisms probably would have flourished where they were
      more protected, such as in the deep ocean or far beneath the surface of the Earth. Strong volcanic
      activity was common on Earth at this time, so it is likely that these first organisms—the first
      prokaryotes—were adapted to very high temperatures. Because early Earth was prone to
      geological upheaval and volcanic eruption, and was subject to bombardment by mutagenic
      radiation from the sun, the first organisms were prokaryotes that must have withstood these harsh
      conditions.

      Microbial Mats
      Microbial mats or large biofilms may represent the earliest forms of prokaryotic life on Earth; there
      is fossil evidence of their presence starting about 3.5 billion years ago. It is remarkable that
      cellular life appeared on Earth only a billion years after the Earth itself formed, suggesting that
      pre-cellular “life” that could replicate itself had evolved much earlier. A microbial mat is a multi-
      layered sheet of prokaryotes (Figure 22.2) that includes mostly bacteria, but also archaeans.
      Microbial mats are only a few centimeters thick, and they typically grow where different types of
      materials interface, mostly on moist surfaces. The various types of prokaryotes that comprise
      them carry out different metabolic pathways, and that is the reason for their various colors.
      Prokaryotes in a microbial mat are held together by a glue-like sticky substance that they secrete
      called extracellular matrix.

      The first microbial mats likely obtained their energy from chemicals found near hydrothermal
      vents. A hydrothermal vent is a breakage or fissure in the Earth’s surface that releases
      geothermally heated water. With the evolution of photosynthesis about three billion years ago,
      some prokaryotes in microbial mats came to use a more widely available energy
      source—sunlight—whereas others were still dependent on chemicals from hydrothermal vents for
      energy and food.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                22.1 • Prokaryotic Diversity   567




FIGURE 22.2 A microbial mat. (a) This microbial mat, about one meter in diameter, is growing over a hydrothermal vent in the Pacific Ocean
in a region known as the “Pacific Ring of Fire.” The mat’s colony of bacteria helps retain microbial nutrients. Chimneys such as the one
indicated by the arrow allow gases to escape. (b) In this micrograph, bacteria are visualized using fluorescence microscopy. (credit a:
modification of work by Dr. Bob Embley, NOAA PMEL, Chief Scientist; credit b: modification of work by Ricardo Murga, Rodney Donlan, CDC;
scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

Stromatolites
Fossilized microbial mats represent the earliest record of life on Earth. A stromatolite is a sedimentary structure
formed when minerals are precipitated out of water by prokaryotes in a microbial mat (Figure 22.3). Stromatolites
form layered rocks made of carbonate or silicate. Although most stromatolites are artifacts from the past, there are
places on Earth where stromatolites are still forming. For example, growing stromatolites have been found in the
Anza-Borrego Desert State Park in San Diego County, California.




FIGURE 22.3 Stromatolites. (a) These living stromatolites are located in Shark Bay, Australia. (b) These fossilized stromatolites, found in
Glacier National Park, Montana, are nearly 1.5 billion years old. (credit a: Robert Young; credit b: P. Carrara, NPS)

The Ancient Atmosphere
Evidence indicates that during the first two billion years of Earth’s existence, the atmosphere was anoxic, meaning
that there was no molecular oxygen. Therefore, only those organisms that can grow without oxygen—anaerobic
organisms—were able to live. Autotrophic organisms that convert solar energy into chemical energy are called
phototrophs, and they appeared within one billion years of the formation of Earth. Then, cyanobacteria, also known
as “blue-green algae,” evolved from these simple phototrophs at least one billion years later. It was the ancestral
cyanobacteria (Figure 22.4) that began the “oxygenation” of the atmosphere: Increased atmospheric oxygen
allowed the evolution of more efficient O2-utilizing catabolic pathways. It also opened up the land to increased
colonization, because some O2 is converted into O3 (ozone) and ozone effectively absorbs the ultraviolet light that
could have otherwise caused lethal mutations in DNA. The current evidence suggests that the increase in O2
concentrations allowed the evolution of other life forms.
568   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea




      FIGURE 22.4 Cyanobacteria. This hot spring in Yellowstone National Park flows toward the foreground. Cyanobacteria in the spring are
      green, and as water flows down the gradient, the intensity of the color increases as cell density increases. The water is cooler at the edges
      of the stream than in the center, causing the edges to appear greener. (credit: Graciela Brelles-Mariño)

      Microbes Are Adaptable: Life in Moderate and Extreme Environments
      Some organisms have developed strategies that allow them to survive harsh conditions. Almost all prokaryotes have
      a cell wall, a protective structure that allows them to survive in both hypertonic and hypotonic aqueous conditions.
      Some soil bacteria are able to form endospores that resist heat and drought, thereby allowing the organism to
      survive until favorable conditions recur. These adaptations, along with others, allow bacteria to remain the most
      abundant life form in all terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems.

      Prokaryotes thrive in a vast array of environments: Some grow in conditions that would seem very normal to us,
      whereas others are able to thrive and grow under conditions that would kill a plant or an animal. Bacteria and
      archaea that are adapted to grow under extreme conditions are called extremophiles, meaning “lovers of
      extremes.” Extremophiles have been found in all kinds of environments: the depths of the oceans, hot springs, the
      Arctic and the Antarctic, in very dry places, deep inside Earth, in harsh chemical environments, and in high radiation
      environments (Figure 22.5), just to mention a few. Because they have specialized adaptations that allow them to live
      in extreme conditions, many extremophiles cannot survive in moderate environments. There are many different
      groups of extremophiles: They are identified based on the conditions in which they grow best, and several habitats
      are extreme in multiple ways. For example, a soda lake is both salty and alkaline, so organisms that live in a soda
      lake must be both alkaliphiles and halophiles (Table 22.1). Other extremophiles, like radioresistant organisms, do
      not prefer an extreme environment (in this case, one with high levels of radiation), but have adapted to survive in it
      (Figure 22.5). Organisms like these give us a better understanding of prokaryotic diversity and open up the
      possibility of finding new prokaryotic species that may lead to the discovery of new therapeutic drugs or have
      industrial applications.

                                                 Extremophiles and Their Preferred Conditions

                                       Extremophile                    Conditions for Optimal Growth

                                    Acidophiles                pH 3 or below

                                    Alkaliphiles               pH 9 or above

                                    Thermophiles               Temperature 60–80 °C (140–176 °F)

                                    Hyperthermophiles          Temperature 80–122 °C (176–250 °F)

                                    Psychrophiles              Temperature of -15-10 °C (5-50 °F) or lower
                                  TABLE 22.1




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              22.1 • Prokaryotic Diversity     569




                                Extremophile                   Conditions for Optimalunderline
                                                                                      Growth                             end underline


                             Halophiles                 Salt concentration of at least 0.2 M

                             Osmophiles                 High sugar concentration

                           TABLE 22.1




FIGURE 22.5 Radiation-tolerant prokaryotes. Deinococcus radiodurans, visualized in this false color transmission electron micrograph, is a
prokaryote that can tolerate very high doses of ionizing radiation. It has developed DNA repair mechanisms that allow it to reconstruct its
chromosome even if it has been broken into hundreds of pieces by radiation or heat. (credit: modification of work by Michael Daly; scale-bar
data from Matt Russell)

Prokaryotes in the Dead Sea
One example of a very harsh environment is the Dead Sea, a hypersaline basin that is located between Jordan and
Israel. Hypersaline environments are essentially concentrated seawater. In the Dead Sea, the sodium concentration
is 10 times higher than that of seawater, and the water contains high levels of magnesium (about 40 times higher
than in seawater) that would be toxic to most living things. Iron, calcium, and magnesium, elements that form
divalent ions (Fe2+, Ca2+, and Mg2+), produce what is commonly referred to as “hard” water. Taken together, the
high concentration of divalent cations, the acidic pH (6.0), and the intense solar radiation flux make the Dead Sea a
                                         1
unique, and uniquely hostile, ecosystem (Figure 22.6).

What sort of prokaryotes do we find in the Dead Sea? The extremely salt-tolerant bacterial mats include
Halobacterium, Haloferax volcanii (which is found in other locations, not only the Dead Sea), Halorubrum
sodomense, and Halobaculum gomorrense, and the archaean Haloarcula marismortui, among others.




1 Bodaker, I, Itai, S, Suzuki, MT, Feingersch, R, Rosenberg, M, Maguire, ME, Shimshon, B, and others. Comparative community genomics in
the Dead Sea: An increasingly extreme environment. The ISME Journal 4 (2010): 399–407, doi:10.1038/ismej.2009.141. published online
24 December 2009.
570   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea




      FIGURE 22.6 Halophilic prokaryotes. (a) The Dead Sea is hypersaline. Nevertheless, salt-tolerant bacteria thrive in this sea. (b) These
      halobacteria cells can form salt-tolerant bacterial mats. (credit a: Julien Menichini; credit b: NASA; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

      Unculturable Prokaryotes and the Viable-but-Non-Culturable State
      The process of culturing bacteria is complex and is one of the greatest discoveries of modern science. German
      physician Robert Koch is credited with discovering the techniques for pure culture, including staining and using
      growth media. Microbiologists typically grow prokaryotes in the laboratory using an appropriate culture medium
      containing all the nutrients needed by the target organism. The medium can be liquid, broth, or solid. After an
      incubation time at the right temperature, there should be evidence of microbial growth (Figure 22.7). Koch's
      assistant Julius Petri invented the Petri dish, whose use persists in today’s laboratories. Koch worked primarily with
      the Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacterium that causes tuberculosis and developed guidelines, called Koch's
      postulates, to identify the organisms responsible for specific diseases. Koch's postulates continue to be widely used
      in the medical community. Koch’s postulates include that an organism can be identified as the cause of disease
      when it is present in all infected samples and absent in all healthy samples, and it is able to reproduce the infection
      after being cultured multiple times. Today, cultures remain a primary diagnostic tool in medicine and other areas of
      molecular biology.




      FIGURE 22.7 Bacteria growing on blood agar plates. In these agar plates, the growth medium is supplemented with red blood cells. Blood
      agar becomes transparent in the presence of hemolytic Streptococcus, which destroys red blood cells and is used to diagnose
      Streptococcus infections. The plate on the left is inoculated with non-hemolytic Staphylococcus (large white colonies), and the plate on the
      right is inoculated with hemolytic Streptococcus (tiny clear colonies). If you look closely at the right plate, you can see that the agar
      surrounding the bacteria has turned clear. (credit: Bill Branson, NCI)

      Koch's postulates can be fully applied only to organisms that can be isolated and cultured. Some prokaryotes,
      however, cannot grow in a laboratory setting. In fact, over 99 percent of bacteria and archaea are unculturable. For
      the most part, this is due to a lack of knowledge as to what to feed these organisms and how to grow them; they
      may have special requirements for growth that remain unknown to scientists, such as needing specific
      micronutrients, pH, temperature, pressure, co-factors, or co-metabolites. Some bacteria cannot be cultured
      because they are obligate intracellular parasites and cannot be grown outside a host cell.

      In other cases, culturable organisms become unculturable under stressful conditions, even though the same
      organism could be cultured previously. Those organisms that cannot be cultured but are not dead are in a viable-
      but-non-culturable (VBNC) state. The VBNC state occurs when prokaryotes respond to environmental stressors by
      entering a dormant state that allows their survival. The criteria for entering into the VBNC state are not completely
      understood. In a process called resuscitation, the prokaryote can go back to “normal” life when environmental



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              22.1 • Prokaryotic Diversity   571



conditions improve.

Is the VBNC state an unusual way of living for prokaryotes? In fact, most of the prokaryotes living in the soil or in
oceanic waters are non-culturable. It has been said that only a small fraction, perhaps one percent, of prokaryotes
can be cultured under laboratory conditions. If these organisms are non-culturable, then how is it known whether
they are present and alive? Microbiologists use molecular techniques, such as the polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
to amplify selected portions of DNA of prokaryotes, e.g., 16S rRNA genes, demonstrating their existence. (Recall
that PCR can make billions of copies of a DNA segment in a process called amplification.)

The Ecology of Biofilms
Some prokaryotes may be unculturable because they require the presence of other prokaryotic species. Until a
couple of decades ago, microbiologists used to think of prokaryotes as isolated entities living apart. This model,
however, does not reflect the true ecology of prokaryotes, most of which prefer to live in communities where they
can interact. As we have seen, a biofilm is a microbial community (Figure 22.8) held together in a gummy-textured
matrix that consists primarily of polysaccharides secreted by the organisms, together with some proteins and
nucleic acids. Biofilms typically grow attached to surfaces. Some of the best-studied biofilms are composed of
prokaryotes, although fungal biofilms have also been described, as well as some composed of a mixture of fungi and
bacteria.

Biofilms are present almost everywhere: they can cause the clogging of pipes and readily colonize surfaces in
industrial settings. In recent, large-scale outbreaks of bacterial contamination of food, biofilms have played a major
role. They also colonize household surfaces, such as kitchen counters, cutting boards, sinks, and toilets, as well as
places on the human body, such as the surfaces of our teeth.

Interactions among the organisms that populate a biofilm, together with their protective exopolysaccharidic (EPS)
environment, make these communities more robust than free-living, or planktonic, prokaryotes. The sticky
substance that holds bacteria together also excludes most antibiotics and disinfectants, making biofilm bacteria
hardier than their planktonic counterparts. Overall, biofilms are very difficult to destroy because they are resistant to
many common forms of sterilization.



        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 22.8 Development of a biofilm. Five stages of biofilm development are shown. During stage 1, initial attachment, bacteria adhere
to a solid surface via weak van der Waals interactions (forces produced by induced electrical interactions between atoms). During stage 2,
irreversible attachment, hairlike appendages called pili permanently anchor the bacteria to the surface. During stage 3, maturation I, the
biofilm grows through cell division and recruitment of other bacteria. An extracellular matrix composed primarily of polysaccharides holds
the biofilm together. During stage 4, maturation II, the biofilm continues to grow and takes on a more complex shape. During stage 5,
dispersal, the biofilm matrix is partly broken down, allowing some bacteria to escape and colonize another surface. Micrographs of a
Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm in each of the stages of development are shown. (credit: D. Davis, Don Monroe, PLoS)

Compared to free-floating bacteria, bacteria in biofilms often show increased resistance to antibiotics and
detergents. Why do you think this might be the case?
572   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea




      22.2 Structure of Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe the basic structure of a typical prokaryote
         • Describe important differences in structure between Archaea and Bacteria

      There are many differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. The name "prokaryote" suggests that
      prokaryotes are defined by exclusion—they are not eukaryotes, or organisms whose cells contain a nucleus and
      other internal membrane-bound organelles. However, all cells have four common structures: the plasma membrane,
      which functions as a barrier for the cell and separates the cell from its environment; the cytoplasm, a complex
      solution of organic molecules and salts inside the cell; a double-stranded DNA genome, the informational archive of
      the cell; and ribosomes, where protein synthesis takes place. Prokaryotes come in various shapes, but many fall into
      three categories: cocci (spherical), bacilli (rod-shaped), and spirilli (spiral-shaped) (Figure 22.9).




      FIGURE 22.9 Common prokaryotic cell types. Prokaryotes fall into three basic categories based on their shape, visualized here using
      scanning electron microscopy: (a) cocci, or spherical (a pair is shown); (b) bacilli, or rod-shaped; and (c) spirilli, or spiral-shaped. (credit a:
      modification of work by Janice Haney Carr, Dr. Richard Facklam, CDC; credit c: modification of work by Dr. David Cox; scale-bar data from
      Matt Russell)

      The Prokaryotic Cell
      Recall that prokaryotes are unicellular organisms that lack membrane-bound organelles or other internal
      membrane-bound structures (Figure 22.10). Their chromosome—usually single—consists of a piece of circular,
      double-stranded DNA located in an area of the cell called the nucleoid. Most prokaryotes have a cell wall outside
      the plasma membrane. The cell wall functions as a protective layer, and it is responsible for the organism’s shape.
      Some bacterial species have a capsule outside the cell wall. The capsule enables the organism to attach to surfaces,
      protects it from dehydration and attack by phagocytic cells, and makes pathogens more resistant to our immune
      responses. Some species also have flagella (singular, flagellum) used for locomotion, and pili (singular, pilus) used
      for attachment to surfaces including the surfaces of other cells. Plasmids, which consist of extra-chromosomal DNA,
      are also present in many species of bacteria and archaea.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   22.2 • Structure of Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea   573




           FIGURE 22.10 The features of a typical prokaryotic cell. Flagella, capsules, and pili are not found in all prokaryotes.

Recall that prokaryotes are divided into two different domains, Bacteria and Archaea, which together with Eukarya,
comprise the three domains of life (Figure 22.11).




FIGURE 22.11 The three domains of living organisms. Bacteria and Archaea are both prokaryotes but differ enough to be placed in separate
domains. An ancestor of modern Archaea is believed to have given rise to Eukarya, the third domain of life. Major groups of Archaea and
Bacteria are shown.

Characteristics of bacterial phyla are described in Figure 22.12 and Figure 22.13. Major bacterial phyla include the
Proteobacteria, the Chlamydias, the Spirochaetes, the photosynthetic Cyanobacteria, and the Gram-positive
bacteria. The Proteobacteria are in turn subdivided into several classes, from the Alpha- to the Epsilon
proteobacteria. Eukaryotic mitochondria are thought to be the descendants of alphaproteobacteria, while
eukaryotic chloroplasts are derived from cyanobacteria. Archaeal phyla are described in Figure 22.14.
574   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea




      FIGURE 22.12 The Proteobacteria. Phylum Proteobacteria is one of up to 52 bacteria phyla. Proteobacteria is further subdivided into five
      classes, Alpha through Epsilon. (credit “Rickettsia rickettsii”: modification of work by CDC; credit “Spirillum minus”: modification of work by
      Wolframm Adlassnig; credit “Vibrio cholera”: modification of work by Janice Haney Carr, CDC; credit “Desulfovibrio vulgaris”: modification
      of work by Graham Bradley; credit “Campylobacter”: modification of work by De Wood, Pooley, USDA, ARS, EMU; scale-bar data from Matt
      Russell)




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 22.2 • Structure of Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea        575




FIGURE 22.13 Other bacterial phyla. Chlamydia, Spirochetes, Cyanobacteria, and Gram-positive bacteria are described in this table. Note
that bacterial shape is not phylum-dependent; bacteria within a phylum may be cocci, rod-shaped, or spiral. (credit “Chlamydia
trachomatis”: modification of work by Dr. Lance Liotta Laboratory, NCI; credit “Treponema pallidum”: modification of work by Dr. David Cox,
CDC; credit “Phormidium”: modification of work by USGS; credit “Clostridium difficile”: modification of work by Lois S. Wiggs, CDC; scale-
bar data from Matt Russell)
576   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea




      FIGURE 22.14 Archaeal phyla. Archaea are separated into four phyla: the Korarchaeota, Euryarchaeota, Crenarchaeota, and
      Nanoarchaeota. (credit “Halobacterium”: modification of work by NASA; credit “Nanoarchaeotum equitans”: modification of work by Karl O.
      Stetter; credit “Korarchaeota”: modification of work by Office of Science of the U.S. Dept. of Energy; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

      The Plasma Membrane of Prokaryotes
      The prokaryotic plasma membrane is a thin lipid bilayer (6 to 8 nanometers) that completely surrounds the cell and
      separates the inside from the outside. Its selectively permeable nature keeps ions, proteins, and other molecules
      within the cell and prevents them from diffusing into the extracellular environment, while other molecules may
      move through the membrane. Recall that the general structure of a cell membrane is a phospholipid bilayer
      composed of two layers of lipid molecules. In archaeal cell membranes, isoprene (phytanyl) chains linked to glycerol
      replace the fatty acids linked to glycerol in bacterial membranes. Some archaeal membranes are lipid monolayers
      instead of bilayers (Figure 22.15).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  22.2 • Structure of Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea      577




FIGURE 22.15 Bacterial and archaeal phospholipids. Archaeal phospholipids differ from those found in Bacteria and Eukarya in two ways.
First, they have branched phytanyl sidechains instead of linear ones. Second, an ether bond instead of an ester bond connects the lipid to
the glycerol.

The Cell Wall of Prokaryotes
The cytoplasm of prokaryotic cells has a high concentration of dissolved solutes. Therefore, the osmotic pressure
within the cell is relatively high. The cell wall is a protective layer that surrounds some cells and gives them shape
and rigidity. It is located outside the cell membrane and prevents osmotic lysis (bursting due to increasing volume).
The chemical composition of the cell wall varies between Archaea and Bacteria, and also varies between bacterial
species.

Bacterial cell walls contain peptidoglycan, composed of polysaccharide chains that are cross-linked by unusual
peptides containing both L- and D-amino acids including D-glutamic acid and D-alanine. (Proteins normally have
only L-amino acids; as a consequence, many of our antibiotics work by mimicking D-amino acids and therefore have
specific effects on bacterial cell-wall development.) There are more than 100 different forms of peptidoglycan. S-
layer (surface layer) proteins are also present on the outside of cell walls of both Archaea and Bacteria.

Bacteria are divided into two major groups: Gram positive and Gram negative, based on their reaction to Gram
staining. Note that all Gram-positive bacteria belong to two phyla (Firmicutes and Actinobacteria); bacteria in the
other phyla (Proteobacteria, Chlamydias, Spirochetes, Cyanobacteria, and others) are Gram-negative. The Gram
staining method is named after its inventor, Danish scientist Hans Christian Gram (1853–1938). The different
bacterial responses to the staining procedure are ultimately due to cell wall structure. Gram-positive organisms
typically lack the outer membrane found in Gram-negative organisms (Figure 22.16). Up to 90 percent of the cell-
wall in Gram-positive bacteria is composed of peptidoglycan, and most of the rest is composed of acidic substances
called teichoic acids. Teichoic acids may be covalently linked to lipids in the plasma membrane to form lipoteichoic
acids. Lipoteichoic acids anchor the cell wall to the cell membrane. Gram-negative bacteria have a relatively thin cell
wall composed of a few layers of peptidoglycan (only 10 percent of the total cell wall), surrounded by an outer
envelope containing lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and lipoproteins. This outer envelope is sometimes referred to as a
second lipid bilayer. The chemistry of this outer envelope is very different, however, from that of the typical lipid
bilayer that forms plasma membranes.
578   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea




              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 22.16 Cell walls in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Bacteria are divided into two major groups: Gram positive and Gram
      negative. Both groups have a cell wall composed of peptidoglycan: in Gram-positive bacteria, the wall is thick, whereas in Gram-negative
      bacteria, the wall is thin. In Gram-negative bacteria, the cell wall is surrounded by an outer membrane that contains lipopolysaccharides
      and lipoproteins. Porins are proteins in this cell membrane that allow substances to pass through the outer membrane of Gram-negative
      bacteria. In Gram-positive bacteria, lipoteichoic acid anchors the cell wall to the cell membrane. (credit: modification of work by
      "Franciscosp2"/Wikimedia Commons)

      Which of the following statements is true?

        a.   Gram-positive bacteria have a single cell wall anchored to the cell membrane by lipoteichoic acid.
        b.   Porins allow entry of substances into both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
        c.   The cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria is thick, and the cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria is thin.
        d.   Gram-negative bacteria have a cell wall made of peptidoglycan, whereas Gram-positive bacteria have a cell
             wall made of lipoteichoic acid.


      Archaean cell walls do not have peptidoglycan. There are four different types of archaean cell walls. One type is
      composed of pseudopeptidoglycan, which is similar to peptidoglycan in morphology but contains different sugars
      in the polysaccharide chain. The other three types of cell walls are composed of polysaccharides, glycoproteins, or
      pure protein. Other differences between Bacteria and Archaea are seen in Table 22.2. Note that features related to
      DNA replication, transcription and translation in Archaea are similar to those seen in eukaryotes.

                                        Differences and Similarities between Bacteria and Archaea

                     Structural Characteristic                    Bacteria                             Archaea

                     Cell type                          Prokaryotic                       Prokaryotic

                     Cell morphology                    Variable                          Variable

                     Cell wall                          Contains peptidoglycan            Does not contain peptidoglycan

                     Cell membrane type                 Lipid bilayer                     Lipid bilayer or lipid monolayer

                     Plasma membrane lipids             Fatty acids-glycerol ester        Phytanyl-glycerol ethers

                     Chromosome                         Typically circular                Typically circular
                    TABLE 22.2




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    22.2 • Structure of Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea       579




                Structural Characteristic                      Bacteria                               Archaea

                Replication origins                  Single                             Multiple

                RNA polymerase                       Single                             Multiple

                Initiator tRNA                       Formyl-methionine                  Methionine

                Streptomycin inhibition              Sensitive                          Resistant

                Calvin cycle                         Yes                                No

              TABLE 22.2

Reproduction
Reproduction in prokaryotes is asexual and usually takes place by binary fission. (Recall that the DNA of a
prokaryote is a single, circular chromosome.) Prokaryotes do not undergo mitosis; instead, the chromosome is
replicated and the two resulting copies separate from one another, due to the growth of the cell. The prokaryote,
now enlarged, is pinched inward at its equator and the two resulting cells, which are clones, separate. Binary fission
does not provide an opportunity for genetic recombination or genetic diversity, but prokaryotes can share genes by
three other mechanisms.

In transformation, the prokaryote takes in DNA shed by other prokaryotes into its environment. If a nonpathogenic
bacterium takes up DNA for a toxin gene from a pathogen and incorporates the new DNA into its own chromosome,
it too may become pathogenic. In transduction, bacteriophages, the viruses that infect bacteria, may move short
pieces of chromosomal DNA from one bacterium to another. Transduction results in a recombinant organism.
Archaea also have viruses that may translocate genetic material from one individual to another. In conjugation, DNA
is transferred from one prokaryote to another by means of a pilus, which brings the organisms into contact with one
another, and provides a channel for transfer of DNA. The DNA transferred can be in the form of a plasmid or as a
composite molecule, containing both plasmid and chromosomal DNA. These three processes of DNA exchange are
shown in Figure 22.17.

Reproduction can be very rapid: a few minutes for some species. This short generation time coupled with
mechanisms of genetic recombination and high rates of mutation result in the rapid evolution of prokaryotes,
allowing them to respond to environmental changes (such as the introduction of an antibiotic) very quickly.




FIGURE 22.17 Gene transfer mechanisms in prokaryotes. There are three mechanisms by which prokaryotes can exchange DNA. In (a)
transformation, the cell takes up prokaryotic DNA directly from the environment. The DNA may remain separate as plasmid DNA or be
incorporated into the host genome. In (b) transduction, a bacteriophage injects DNA into the cell that contains a small fragment of DNA
from a different prokaryote. In (c) conjugation, DNA is transferred from one cell to another via a mating bridge, or pilus, that connects the
two cells after the sex pilus draws the two bacteria close enough to form the bridge.
580   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea




              EVOLUTION CONNECTION

      The Evolution of Prokaryotes
      How do scientists answer questions about the evolution of prokaryotes? Unlike with animals, artifacts in the fossil
      record of prokaryotes offer very little information. Fossils of ancient prokaryotes look like tiny bubbles in rock. Some
      scientists turn to genetics and to the principle of the molecular clock, which holds that the more recently two
      species have diverged, the more similar their genes (and thus proteins) will be. Conversely, species that diverged
      long ago will have more genes that are dissimilar.

      Scientists at the NASA Astrobiology Institute and at the European Molecular Biology Laboratory collaborated to
                                                                                                          2
      analyze the molecular evolution of 32 specific proteins common to 72 species of prokaryotes. The model they
      derived from their data indicates that three important groups of bacteria—Actinobacteria, Deinococcus, and
      Cyanobacteria (collectively called Terrabacteria by the authors)—were the first to colonize land. Actinobacteria are a
      group of very common Gram-positive bacteria that produce branched structures like fungal mycelia, and include
      species important in decomposition of organic wastes. You will recall that Deinococcus is a genus of bacterium that
      is highly resistant to ionizing radiation. It has a thick peptidoglycan layer in addition to a second external membrane,
      so it has features of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.

      Cyanobacteria are photosynthesizers, and were probably responsible for the production of oxygen on the ancient
      earth. The timelines of divergence suggest that bacteria (members of the domain Bacteria) diverged from common
      ancestral species between 2.5 and 3.2 billion years ago, whereas the Archaea diverged earlier: between 3.1 and 4.1
      billion years ago. Eukarya later diverged from the archaean line. The work further suggests that stromatolites that
      formed prior to the advent of cyanobacteria (about 2.6 billion years ago) photosynthesized in an anoxic environment
      and that because of the modifications of the Terrabacteria for land (resistance to drying and the possession of
      compounds that protect the organism from excess light), photosynthesis using oxygen may be closely linked to
      adaptations to survive on land.


      22.3 Prokaryotic Metabolism
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Identify the macronutrients needed by prokaryotes, and explain their importance
         • Describe the ways in which prokaryotes get energy and carbon for life processes
         • Describe the roles of prokaryotes in the carbon and nitrogen cycles

      Prokaryotes are metabolically diverse organisms. In many cases, a prokaryote may be placed into a species clade by
      its defining metabolic features: Can it metabolize lactose? Can it grow on citrate? Does it produce H2S? Does it
      ferment carbohydrates to produce acid and gas? Can it grow under anaerobic conditions? Since metabolism and
      metabolites are the product of enzyme pathways, and enzymes are encoded in genes, the metabolic capabilities of a
      prokaryote are a reflection of its genome. There are many different environments on Earth with various energy and
      carbon sources, and variable conditions to which prokaryotes may be able to adapt. Prokaryotes have been able to
      live in every environment from deep-water volcanic vents to Antarctic ice by using whatever energy and carbon
      sources are available. Prokaryotes fill many niches on Earth, including involvement in nitrogen and carbon cycles,
      photosynthetic production of oxygen, decomposition of dead organisms, and thriving as parasitic, commensal, or
      mutualistic organisms inside multicellular organisms, including humans. The very broad range of environments that
      prokaryotes occupy is possible because they have diverse metabolic processes.

      Needs of Prokaryotes
      The diverse environments and ecosystems on Earth have a wide range of conditions in terms of temperature,
      available nutrients, acidity, salinity, oxygen availability, and energy sources. Prokaryotes are very well equipped to
      make their living out of a vast array of nutrients and environmental conditions. To live, prokaryotes need a source of
      energy, a source of carbon, and some additional nutrients.

      2 Battistuzzi, FU, Feijao, A, and Hedges, SB. A genomic timescale of prokaryote evolution: Insights into the origin of methanogenesis,
      phototrophy, and the colonization of land. BioMed Central: Evolutionary Biology 4 (2004): 44, doi:10.1186/1471-2148-4-44.



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            22.3 • Prokaryotic Metabolism   581



Macronutrients
Cells are essentially a well-organized assemblage of macromolecules and water. Recall that macromolecules are
produced by the polymerization of smaller units called monomers. For cells to build all of the molecules required to
sustain life, they need certain substances, collectively called nutrients. When prokaryotes grow in nature, they must
obtain their nutrients from the environment. Nutrients that are required in large amounts are called macronutrients,
whereas those required in smaller or trace amounts are called micronutrients. Just a handful of elements are
considered macronutrients—carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur. (A mnemonic for
remembering these elements is the acronym CHONPS.)

Why are these macronutrients needed in large amounts? They are the components of organic compounds in cells,
including water. Carbon is the major element in all macromolecules: carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic acids, lipids,
and many other compounds. Carbon accounts for about 50 percent of the composition of the cell. In contrast,
nitrogen represents only 12 percent of the total dry weight of a typical cell. Nitrogen is a component of proteins,
nucleic acids, and other cell constituents. Most of the nitrogen available in nature is either atmospheric nitrogen (N2)
or another inorganic form. Diatomic (N2) nitrogen, however, can be converted into an organic form only by certain
microorganisms, called nitrogen-fixing organisms. Both hydrogen and oxygen are part of many organic compounds
and of water. Phosphorus is required by all organisms for the synthesis of nucleotides and phospholipids. Sulfur is
part of the structure of some amino acids such as cysteine and methionine, and is also present in several vitamins
and coenzymes. Other important macronutrients are potassium (K), magnesium (Mg), calcium (Ca), and sodium
(Na). Although these elements are required in smaller amounts, they are very important for the structure and
function of the prokaryotic cell.

Micronutrients
In addition to these macronutrients, prokaryotes require various metallic elements in small amounts. These are
referred to as micronutrients or trace elements. For example, iron is necessary for the function of the cytochromes
involved in electron-transport reactions. Some prokaryotes require other elements—such as boron (B), chromium
(Cr), and manganese (Mn)—primarily as enzyme cofactors.

The Ways in Which Prokaryotes Obtain Energy
Prokaryotes are classified both by the way they obtain energy, and by the carbon source they use for producing
organic molecules. These categories are summarized in Table 22.3. Prokaryotes can use different sources of energy
to generate the ATP needed for biosynthesis and other cellular activities. Phototrophs (or phototrophic organisms)
obtain their energy from sunlight. Phototrophs trap the energy of light using chlorophylls, or in a few cases, bacterial
rhodopsin. (Rhodopsin-using phototrophs, oddly, are phototrophic, but not photosynthetic, since they do not fix
carbon.) Chemotrophs (or chemosynthetic organisms) obtain their energy from chemical compounds. Chemotrophs
that can use organic compounds as energy sources are called chemoorganotrophs. Those that can use inorganic
compounds, like sulfur or iron compounds, as energy sources are called chemolithotrophs.

Energy-producing pathways may be either aerobic, using oxygen as the terminal electron acceptor, or anaerobic,
using either simple inorganic compounds or organic molecules as the terminal electron acceptor. Since prokaryotes
lived on Earth for nearly a billion years before photosynthesis produced significant amounts of oxygen for aerobic
respiration, many species of both Bacteria and Archaea are anaerobic and their metabolic activities are important in
the carbon and nitrogen cycles discussed below.

The Ways in Which Prokaryotes Obtain Carbon
Prokaryotes not only can use different sources of energy, but also different sources of carbon compounds.
Autotrophic prokaryotes synthesize organic molecules from carbon dioxide. In contrast, heterotrophic prokaryotes
obtain carbon from organic compounds. To make the picture more complex, the terms that describe how
prokaryotes obtain energy and carbon can be combined. Thus, photoautotrophs use energy from sunlight, and
carbon from carbon dioxide and water, whereas chemoheterotrophs obtain both energy and carbon from an organic
chemical source. Chemolithoautotrophs obtain their energy from inorganic compounds, and they build their
complex molecules from carbon dioxide. Finally, prokaryotes that get their energy from light, but their carbon from
organic compounds, are photoheterotrophs. The table below (Table 22.3) summarizes carbon and energy sources in
prokaryotes.
582   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea




                                               Carbon and Energy Sources in Prokaryotes

                      Energy Source       Electron Source       Carbon Source             Nutritional Type

                                                                Organic material
                                                                                   Photoorganoheterotroph
                                                                (heterotroph)
                                          Organic material
                                           (organotroph)
                                                                 Carbon dioxide
                                                                  (autotroph)
                           Light
                        (phototroph)
                                                                Organic material
                                                                (heterotroph)
                                         Inorganic material
                                            (lithotroph)
                                                                 Carbon dioxide
                                                                                      Photolithoautotroph
                                                                  (autotroph)

                                                                Organic material
                                                                                   Chemoorganoheterotroph
                                                                 (heterotroph)
                                          Organic material
                                           (organotroph)
                                                                 Carbon dioxide
                                                                  (autotroph)
                         Chemicals
                       (chemotroph)
                                                                Organic material
                                                                                     Chemolithoheterotroph
                                                                 (heterotroph)
                                         Inorganic material
                                            (lithotroph)
                                                                 Carbon dioxide
                                                                                      Chemolithoautotroph
                                                                  (autotroph)

                     TABLE 22.3

      Role of Prokaryotes in Ecosystems
      Prokaryotes are ubiquitous: There is no niche or ecosystem in which they are not present. Prokaryotes play many
      roles in the environments they occupy. The roles they play in the carbon and nitrogen cycles are vital to life on Earth.
      In addition, the current scientific consensus suggests that metabolically interactive prokaryotic communities may
      have been the basis for the emergence of eukaryotic cells.

      Prokaryotes and the Carbon Cycle
      Carbon is one of the most important macronutrients, and prokaryotes play an important role in the carbon cycle
      (Figure 22.18). The carbon cycle traces the movement of carbon from inorganic to organic compounds and back
      again. Carbon is cycled through Earth’s major reservoirs: land, the atmosphere, aquatic environments, sediments
      and rocks, and biomass. In a way, the carbon cycle echoes the role of the “four elements” first proposed by the
      ancient Greek philosopher, Empedocles: fire, water, earth, and air. Carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere
      by land plants and marine prokaryotes, and is returned to the atmosphere via the respiration of chemoorganotrophic
      organisms, including prokaryotes, fungi, and animals. Although the largest carbon reservoir in terrestrial ecosystems
      is in rocks and sediments, that carbon is not readily available.

      Participants in the carbon cycle are roughly divided among producers, consumers, and decomposers of organic
      carbon compounds. The primary producers of organic carbon compounds from CO2 are land plants and
      photosynthetic bacteria. A large amount of available carbon is found in living land plants. A related source of carbon
      compounds is humus, which is a mixture of organic materials from dead plants and prokaryotes that have resisted
      decomposition. (The term "humus," by the way, is the root of the word "human.") Consumers such as animals and
      other heterotrophs use organic compounds generated by producers and release carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.
      Other bacteria and fungi, collectively called decomposers, carry out the breakdown (decomposition) of plants and
      animals and their organic compounds. Most carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is derived from the respiration of



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          22.3 • Prokaryotic Metabolism   583



microorganisms that decompose dead animals, plants, and humus.

In aqueous environments and their anoxic sediments, there is another carbon cycle taking place. In this case, the
cycle is based on one-carbon compounds. In anoxic sediments, prokaryotes, mostly archaea, produce methane
(CH4). This methane moves into the zone above the sediment, which is richer in oxygen and supports bacteria called
methane oxidizers that oxidize methane to carbon dioxide, which then returns to the atmosphere.




FIGURE 22.18 The carbon cycle. Prokaryotes play a significant role in continuously moving carbon through the biosphere. (credit:
modification of work by John M. Evans and Howard Perlman, USGS)

Prokaryotes and the Nitrogen Cycle
Nitrogen is a very important element for life because it is a major constituent of proteins and nucleic acids. It is a
macronutrient, and in nature, it is recycled from organic compounds to ammonia, ammonium ions, nitrate, nitrite,
and nitrogen gas by many processes, many of which are carried out only by prokaryotes. As illustrated in Figure
22.19, prokaryotes are key to the nitrogen cycle. The largest pool of nitrogen available in the terrestrial ecosystem is
gaseous nitrogen (N2) from the air, but this nitrogen is not usable by plants, which are primary producers. Gaseous
nitrogen is transformed, or “fixed” into more readily available forms, such as ammonia (NH3), through the process of
nitrogen fixation. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria include Azotobacter in soil and the ubiquitous photosynthetic
cyanobacteria. Some nitrogen fixing bacteria, like Rhizobium, live in symbiotic relationships in the roots of legumes.
Another source of ammonia is ammonification, the process by which ammonia is released during the
decomposition of nitrogen-containing organic compounds. The ammonium ion is progressively oxidized by different
species of bacteria in a process called nitrification. The nitrification process begins with the conversion of
ammonium to nitrite (NO2-), and continues with the conversion of nitrite to nitrate. Nitrification in soils is carried out
by bacteria belonging to the genera Nitrosomas, Nitrobacter, and Nitrospira. Most nitrogen in soil is in the form of
ammonium (NH4+) or nitrate (NO3-). Ammonia and nitrate can be used by plants or converted to other forms.

Ammonia released into the atmosphere, however, represents only 15 percent of the total nitrogen released; the rest
is as N2 and N2O (nitrous oxide). Ammonia is catabolized anaerobically by some prokaryotes, yielding N2 as the final
product. Denitrifying bacteria reverse the process of nitrification, reducing the nitrate from soils to gaseous
compounds such as N2O, NO, and N2.
584   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea




              VISUAL CONNECTION




            FIGURE 22.19 The nitrogen cycle. Prokaryotes play a key role in the nitrogen cycle. (credit: Environmental Protection Agency)

      Which of the following statements about the nitrogen cycle is false?

        a. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria exist on the root nodules of legumes and in the soil.
        b. Denitrifying bacteria convert nitrates (NO3-) into nitrogen gas (N2).
        c. Ammonification is the process by which ammonium ion (NH4+) is released from decomposing organic
           compounds.
        d. Nitrification is the process by which nitrites (NO2-) are converted to ammonium ion (NH4+).


      22.4 Bacterial Diseases in Humans
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Identify bacterial diseases that caused historically important plagues and epidemics
         • Describe the link between biofilms and foodborne diseases
         • Explain how overuse of antibiotics may be creating “super bugs”
         • Explain the importance of MRSA with respect to the problems of antibiotic resistance

      To a prokaryote, humans may be just another housing opportunity. Unfortunately, the tenancy of some species can
      have harmful effects and cause disease. Bacteria or other infectious agents that cause harm to their human hosts
      are called pathogens. Devastating pathogen-borne diseases and plagues, both viral and bacterial in nature, have
      affected humans and their ancestors for millions of years. The true cause of these diseases was not understood until
      modern scientific thought developed, and many people thought that diseases were a “spiritual punishment.” Only
      within the past several centuries have people understood that staying away from afflicted persons, disposing of the



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    22.4 • Bacterial Diseases in Humans      585



corpses and personal belongings of victims of illness, and sanitation practices reduced their own chances of getting
sick.

Epidemiologists study how diseases are transmitted and how they affect a population. Often, they must following
the course of an epidemic—a disease that occurs in an unusually high number of individuals in a population at the
same time. In contrast, a pandemic is a widespread, and usually worldwide, epidemic. An endemic disease is a
disease that is always present, usually at low incidence, in a population.

Long History of Bacterial Disease
There are records about infectious diseases as far back as 3000 B.C. A number of significant pandemics caused by
bacteria have been documented over several hundred years. Some of the most memorable pandemics led to the
decline of cities and entire nations.

In the 21st century, infectious diseases remain among the leading causes of death worldwide, despite advances
made in medical research and treatments in recent decades. A disease spreads when the pathogen that causes it is
passed from one person to another. For a pathogen to cause disease, it must be able to reproduce in the host’s body
and damage the host in some way.

The Plague of Athens
In 430 B.C., the Plague of Athens killed one-quarter of the Athenian troops who were fighting in the great
Peloponnesian War and weakened Athens’s dominance and power. The plague impacted people living in
overcrowded Athens as well as troops aboard ships that had to return to Athens. The source of the plague may have
been identified recently when researchers from the University of Athens were able to use DNA from teeth recovered
from a mass grave. The scientists identified nucleotide sequences from a pathogenic bacterium, Salmonella enterica
                                                          3
serovar Typhi (Figure 22.20), which causes typhoid fever. This disease is commonly seen in overcrowded areas
and has caused epidemics throughout recorded history.




FIGURE 22.20 Salmonella enterica. Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi, the causative agent of Typhoid fever, is a Gram-negative, rod-
shaped gamma proteobacterium. Typhoid fever, which is spread through feces, causes intestinal hemorrhage, high fever, delirium, and
dehydration. Today, between 16 and 33 million cases of this re-emerging disease occur annually, resulting in over 200,000 deaths. Carriers
of the disease can be asymptomatic. In a famous case in the early 1900s, a cook named Mary Mallon (“Typhoid Mary”) unknowingly spread
the disease to over fifty people, three of whom died. Other serotypes of Salmonella cause food poisoning. (credit: modification of work by
NCI, CDC)


3 Papagrigorakis MJ, Synodinos PN, and Yapijakis C. Ancient typhoid epidemic reveals possible ancestral strain of Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhi. Infect Genet Evol 7 (2007): 126–7, Epub 2006 Jun.
586   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea



      Bubonic Plagues
      From 541 to 750, the Plague of Justinian, an outbreak of what was likely bubonic plague, eliminated one-quarter to
      one-half of the human population in the eastern Mediterranean region. The population in Europe dropped by 50
      percent during this outbreak. Astoundingly, bubonic plague would strike Europe more than once!

      Bubonic plague is caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis. One of the most devastating pandemics attributed to
      bubonic plague was the Black Death (1346 to 1361). It is thought to have originated in China and spread along the
      Silk Road, a network of land and sea trade routes, to the Mediterranean region and Europe, carried by fleas living on
      black rats that were always present on ships. The Black Death was probably named for the tissue necrosis (Figure
      22.21c) that can be one of the symptoms. The "buboes" of bubonic plague were painfully swollen areas of lymphatic
      tissue. A pneumonic form of the plague, spread by the coughing and sneezing of infected individuals, spreads
      directly from human to human and can cause death within a week. The pneumonic form was responsible for the
      rapid spread of the Black Death in Europe. The Black Death reduced the world’s population from an estimated 450
      million to about 350 to 375 million. Bubonic plague struck London yet again in the mid-1600s (Figure 22.21). In
      modern times, approximately 1,000 to 3,000 cases of plague arise globally each year, and a “sylvatic” form of
      plague, carried by fleas living on rodents such as prairie dogs and black footed ferrets, infects 10 to 20 people
      annually in the American Southwest. Although contracting bubonic plague before antibiotics meant almost certain
      death, the bacterium responds to several types of modern antibiotics, and mortality rates from plague are now very
      low.




      FIGURE 22.21 The Black Death. The (a) Great Plague of London killed an estimated 200,000 people, or about 20 percent of the city’s
      population. The causative agent, the (b) bacterium Yersinia pestis, is a Gram-negative, rod-shaped bacterium from the class
      Gammaproteobacteria. The disease is transmitted through the bite of an infected flea, which is carried on a rodent. Symptoms include
      swollen lymph nodes, fever, seizure, vomiting of blood, and (c) gangrene. (credit b: Rocky Mountain Laboratories, NIAID, NIH; scale-bar
      data from Matt Russell; credit c: Textbook of Military Medicine, Washington, D.C., U.S. Dept. of the Army, Office of the Surgeon General,
      Borden Institute)


           LINK TO LEARNING
      Watch a video (https://openstax.org/l/black_death) on the modern understanding of the Black Death—bubonic
      plague in Europe during the 14th century.


      Migration of Diseases to New Populations
      One of the negative consequences of human exploration was the accidental “biological warfare” that resulted from
      the transport of a pathogen into a population that had not previously been exposed to it. Over the centuries,
      Europeans tended to develop genetic immunity to endemic infectious diseases, but when European conquerors
      reached the western hemisphere, they brought with them disease-causing bacteria and viruses, which triggered
      epidemics that completely devastated many diverse populations of Native Americans, who had no natural
      resistance to many European diseases. It has been estimated that up to 90 percent of Native Americans died from
      infectious diseases after the arrival of Europeans, making conquest of the New World a foregone conclusion.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     22.4 • Bacterial Diseases in Humans       587



Emerging and Re-emerging Diseases
The distribution of a particular disease is dynamic. Changes in the environment, the pathogen, or the host
population can dramatically impact the spread of a disease. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), an
emerging disease (Figure 22.22) is one that has appeared in a population for the first time, or that may have existed
previously but is rapidly increasing in incidence or geographic range. This definition also includes re-emerging
diseases that were previously under control. Approximately 75 percent of recently emerging infectious diseases
affecting humans are zoonotic diseases. Zoonoses are diseases that primarily infect animals but can be transmitted
to humans; some are of viral origin and some are of bacterial origin. Brucellosis is an example of a prokaryotic
zoonosis that is re-emerging in some regions, and necrotizing fasciitis (commonly known as flesh-eating bacteria)
has been increasing in virulence for the last 80 years for unknown reasons.




FIGURE 22.22 Emerging diseases. The map shows regions where bacterial diseases are emerging or re-emerging. (credit: modification of
work by NIH)

Some of the present emerging diseases are not actually new, but are diseases that were catastrophic in the past
(Figure 22.23). They devastated populations and became dormant for a while, just to come back, sometimes more
virulent than before, as was the case with bubonic plague. Other diseases, like tuberculosis, were never eradicated
but were under control in some regions of the world until coming back, mostly in urban centers with high
concentrations of immunocompromised people. WHO has identified certain diseases whose worldwide re-
emergence should be monitored. Among these are three viral diseases (dengue fever, yellow fever, and zika), and
three bacterial diseases (diphtheria, cholera, and bubonic plague). The war against infectious diseases has no
foreseeable end.




FIGURE 22.23 Lyme Disease. Lyme disease often, but not always, results in (a) a characteristic bullseye rash. The disease is caused by a (b)
Gram-negative spirochete bacterium of the genus Borrelia. The bacteria (c) infect ticks, which in turn infect mice. Deer are the preferred
secondary host, but the ticks also may feed on humans. Untreated, the disease causes chronic disorders in the nervous system, eyes,
joints, and heart. The disease is named after Lyme, Connecticut, where an outbreak occurred in 1995 and has subsequently spread. The
disease is not new, however. Genetic evidence suggests that Ötzi the Iceman, a 5,300-year-old mummy found in the Alps, was infected
588   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea



      with Borrelia. (credit a: James Gathany, CDC; credit b: CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

      Foodborne Diseases
      Prokaryotes are everywhere: They readily colonize the surface of any type of material, and food is not an exception.
      Most of the time, prokaryotes colonize food and food-processing equipment in the form of a biofilm, as we have
      discussed earlier. Outbreaks of bacterial infection related to food consumption are common. A foodborne disease
      (commonly called “food poisoning”) is an illness resulting from the consumption the pathogenic bacteria, viruses, or
      other parasites that contaminate food. Although the United States has one of the safest food supplies in the world,
      the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has reported that “76 million people get sick, more than
      300,000 are hospitalized, and 5,000 Americans die each year from foodborne illness.”

      The characteristics of foodborne illnesses have changed over time. In the past, it was relatively common to hear
      about sporadic cases of botulism, the potentially fatal disease produced by a toxin from the anaerobic bacterium
      Clostridium botulinum. Some of the most common sources for this bacterium were non-acidic canned foods,
      homemade pickles, and processed meat and sausages. The can, jar, or package created a suitable anaerobic
      environment where Clostridium could grow. Proper sterilization and canning procedures have reduced the incidence
      of this disease.

      While people may tend to think of foodborne illnesses as associated with animal-based foods, most cases are now
      linked to produce. There have been serious, produce-related outbreaks associated with raw spinach in the United
      States and with vegetable sprouts in Germany, and these types of outbreaks have become more common. The raw
      spinach outbreak in 2006 was produced by the bacterium E. coli serotype O157:H7. A serotype is a strain of
      bacteria that carries a set of similar antigens on its cell surface, and there are often many different serotypes of a
      bacterial species. Most E. coli are not particularly dangerous to humans, but serotype O157:H7 can cause bloody
      diarrhea and is potentially fatal.

      All types of food can potentially be contaminated with bacteria. Recent outbreaks of Salmonella reported by the
      CDC occurred in foods as diverse as peanut butter, alfalfa sprouts, and eggs. A deadly outbreak in Germany in 2010
      was caused by E. coli contamination of vegetable sprouts (Figure 22.24). The strain that caused the outbreak was
      found to be a new serotype not previously involved in other outbreaks, which indicates that E. coli is continuously
      evolving. Outbreaks of listeriosis, due to contamination of meats, raw cheeses, and frozen or fresh vegetables with
      Listeria monocytogenes, are becoming more frequent.




      FIGURE 22.24 Foodborne pathogens. (a) Vegetable sprouts grown at an organic farm were the cause of an (b) E. coli outbreak that killed 32
      people and sickened 3,800 in Germany in 2011. The strain responsible, E. coli O104:H4, produces Shiga toxin, a substance that inhibits
      protein synthesis in the host cell. The toxin (c) destroys red blood cells resulting in bloody diarrhea. Deformed red blood cells clog the
      capillaries of the kidney, which can lead to kidney failure, as happened to 845 patients in the 2011 outbreak. Kidney failure is usually
      reversible, but some patients experience kidney problems years later. (credit c: NIDDK, NIH)

      Biofilms and Disease
      Recall that biofilms are microbial communities that are very difficult to destroy. They are responsible for diseases
      such as Legionnaires’ disease, otitis media (ear infections), and various infections in patients with cystic fibrosis.
      They produce dental plaque and colonize catheters, prostheses, transcutaneous and orthopedic devices, contact
      lenses, and internal devices such as pacemakers. They also form in open wounds and burned tissue. In healthcare
      environments, biofilms grow on hemodialysis machines, mechanical ventilators, shunts, and other medical
      equipment. In fact, 65 percent of all infections acquired in the hospital (nosocomial infections) are attributed to
      biofilms. Biofilms are also related to diseases contracted from food because they colonize the surfaces of vegetable



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   22.4 • Bacterial Diseases in Humans   589



leaves and meat, as well as food-processing equipment that isn’t adequately cleaned.

Biofilm infections develop gradually and may not cause immediate symptoms. They are rarely resolved by host
defense mechanisms. Once an infection by a biofilm is established, it is very difficult to eradicate, because biofilms
tend to be resistant to most methods used to control microbial growth, including antibiotics. The matrix that
attaches the cells to a substrate and to other another protects the cells from antibiotics or drugs. In addition, since
biofilms grow slowly, they are less responsive to agents that interfere with cell growth. It has been reported that
biofilms can resist up to 1,000 times the antibiotic concentrations used to kill the same bacteria when they are free-
living or planktonic. An antibiotic dose that large would harm the patient; therefore, scientists are working on new
ways to get rid of biofilms.

Antibiotics: Are We Facing a Crisis?
The word antibiotic comes from the Greek anti meaning “against” and bios meaning “life.” An antibiotic is a
chemical, produced either by microbes or synthetically, that is hostile to or prevents the growth of other organisms.
Today’s media often address concerns about an antibiotic crisis. Are the antibiotics that easily treated bacterial
infections in the past becoming obsolete? Are there new “superbugs”—bacteria that have evolved to become more
resistant to our arsenal of antibiotics? Is this the beginning of the end of antibiotics? All these questions challenge
the healthcare community.

One of the main causes of antibiotic resistance in bacteria is overexposure to antibiotics. The imprudent and
excessive use of antibiotics has resulted in the natural selection of resistant forms of bacteria. The antibiotic kills
most of the infecting bacteria, and therefore only the resistant forms remain. These resistant forms reproduce,
resulting in an increase in the proportion of resistant forms over non-resistant ones. In addition to transmission of
resistance genes to progeny, lateral transfer of resistance genes on plasmids can rapidly spread these genes
through a bacterial population. A major misuse of antibiotics is in patients with viral infections like colds or the flu,
against which antibiotics are useless. Another problem is the excessive use of antibiotics in livestock. The routine
use of antibiotics in animal feed promotes bacterial resistance as well. In the United States, 70 percent of the
antibiotics produced are fed to animals. These antibiotics are given to livestock in low doses, which maximize the
probability of resistance developing, and these resistant bacteria are readily transferred to humans.

     LINK TO LEARNING
Watch a recent news report (https://openstax.org/l/antibiotics) on the problem of routine antibiotic administration
to livestock and antibiotic-resistant bacteria.


One of the Superbugs: MRSA
The imprudent use of antibiotics has paved the way for the expansion of resistant bacterial populations. For
example, Staphylococcus aureus, often called “staph,” is a common bacterium that can live in the human body and
is usually easily treated with antibiotics. However, a very dangerous strain, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA) has made the news over the past few years (Figure 22.25). This strain is resistant to many
commonly used antibiotics, including methicillin, amoxicillin, penicillin, and oxacillin. MRSA can cause infections of
the skin, but it can also infect the bloodstream, lungs, urinary tract, or sites of injury. While MRSA infections are
common among people in healthcare facilities, they have also appeared in healthy people who haven’t been
hospitalized, but who live or work in tight populations (like military personnel and prisoners). Researchers have
expressed concern about the way this latter source of MRSA targets a much younger population than those residing
in care facilities. The Journal of the American Medical Association reported that, among MRSA-afflicted persons in
healthcare facilities, the average age is 68, whereas people with “community-associated MRSA” (CA-MRSA) have an
                     4
average age of 23.




4 Naimi, TS, LeDell, KH, Como-Sabetti, K, et al. Comparison of community- and health care-associated methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus infection. JAMA 290 (2003): 2976–84, doi: 10.1001/jama.290.22.2976.
590   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea




      FIGURE 22.25 MRSA. This scanning electron micrograph shows methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, commonly known as
      MRSA. S. aureus is not always pathogenic, but can cause diseases such as food poisoning and skin and respiratory infections. (credit:
      modification of work by Janice Haney Carr; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

      In summary, the medical community is facing an antibiotic crisis. Some scientists believe that after years of being
      protected from bacterial infections by antibiotics, we may be returning to a time in which a simple bacterial infection
      could again devastate the human population. Researchers are developing new antibiotics, but it takes many years of
      research and clinical trials, plus financial investments in the millions of dollars, to generate an effective and
      approved drug.



              CAREER CONNECTION

      Epidemiologist
      Epidemiology is the study of the occurrence, distribution, and determinants of health and disease in a population. It
      is, therefore, part of public health. An epidemiologist studies the frequency and distribution of diseases within
      human populations and environments.

      Epidemiologists collect data about a particular disease and track its spread to identify the original mode of
      transmission. They sometimes work in close collaboration with historians to try to understand the way a disease
      evolved geographically and over time, tracking the natural history of pathogens. They gather information from
      clinical records, patient interviews, surveillance, and any other available means. That information is used to develop
      strategies, such as vaccinations (Figure 22.26), and design public health policies to reduce the incidence of a
      disease or to prevent its spread. Epidemiologists also conduct rapid investigations in case of an outbreak to
      recommend immediate measures to control it.

      An epidemiologist has a bachelor’s degree, plus a master’s degree in public health (MPH). Many epidemiologists are
      also physicians (and have an M.D. or D.O degree), or they have a Ph.D. in an associated field, such as biology or
      microbiology.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        22.5 • Beneficial Prokaryotes   591




 FIGURE 22.26 Vaccination. Vaccinations can slow the spread of communicable diseases. (credit: modification of work by Daniel Paquet)



22.5 Beneficial Prokaryotes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Explain the need for nitrogen fixation and how it is accomplished
   • Describe the beneficial effects of bacteria that colonize our skin and digestive tracts
   • Identify prokaryotes used during the processing of food
   • Describe the use of prokaryotes in bioremediation

Fortunately, only a few species of prokaryotes are pathogenic! Prokaryotes also interact with humans and other
organisms in a number of ways that are beneficial. For example, prokaryotes are major participants in the carbon
and nitrogen cycles. They produce or process nutrients in the digestive tracts of humans and other animals.
Prokaryotes are used in the production of some human foods, and also have been recruited for the degradation of
hazardous materials. In fact, our life would not be possible without prokaryotes!

Cooperation between Bacteria and Eukaryotes: Nitrogen Fixation
Nitrogen is a very important element to living things, because it is part of nucleotides and amino acids that are the
building blocks of nucleic acids and proteins, respectively. Nitrogen is usually the most limiting element in terrestrial
ecosystems, with atmospheric nitrogen, N2, providing the largest pool of available nitrogen. However, eukaryotes
cannot use atmospheric, gaseous nitrogen to synthesize macromolecules. Fortunately, nitrogen can be “fixed,”
meaning it is converted into a more accessible form—ammonia (NH3)—either biologically or abiotically.

Abiotic nitrogen fixation occurs as a result of physical processes such as lightning or by industrial processes.
Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) is exclusively carried out by prokaryotes: soil bacteria, cyanobacteria, and
Frankia spp. (filamentous bacteria interacting with actinorhizal plants such as alder, bayberry, and sweet fern). After
photosynthesis, BNF is the most important biological process on Earth. The overall nitrogen fixation equation below
represents a series of redox reactions (Pi stands for inorganic phosphate).



The total fixed nitrogen through BNF is about 100 to 180 million metric tons per year, which contributes about 65
percent of the nitrogen used in agriculture.

Cyanobacteria are the most important nitrogen fixers in aquatic environments. In soil, members of the genera
Clostridium and Azotobacter are examples of free-living, nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Other bacteria live symbiotically
with legume plants, providing the most important source of fixed nitrogen. Symbionts may fix more nitrogen in soils
than free-living organisms by a factor of 10. Soil bacteria, collectively called rhizobia, are able to symbiotically
interact with legumes to form nodules, specialized structures where nitrogen fixation occurs (Figure 22.27).
592   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea



      Nitrogenase, the enzyme that fixes nitrogen, is inactivated by oxygen, so the nodule provides an oxygen-free area for
      nitrogen fixation to take place. The oxygen is sequestered by a form of plant hemoglobin called leghemoglobin,
      which protects the nitrogenase, but releases enough oxygen to support respiratory activity.

      Symbiotic nitrogen fixation provides a natural and inexpensive plant fertilizer: It reduces atmospheric nitrogen to
      ammonia, which is easily usable by plants. The use of legumes is an excellent alternative to chemical fertilization
      and is of special interest to sustainable agriculture, which seeks to minimize the use of chemicals and conserve
      natural resources. Through symbiotic nitrogen fixation, the plant benefits from using an endless source of nitrogen:
      the atmosphere. The bacteria benefit from using photosynthates (carbohydrates produced during photosynthesis)
      from the plant and having a protected niche. In addition, the soil benefits from being naturally fertilized. Therefore,
      the use of rhizobia as biofertilizers is a sustainable practice.

      Why are legumes so important? Some, like soybeans, are key sources of agricultural protein. Some of the most
      important legumes consumed by humans are soybeans, peanuts, peas, chickpeas, and beans. Other legumes, such
      as alfalfa, are used to feed cattle.




      FIGURE 22.27 Nitrogen-fixation nodules on soybean roots. Soybean (Glycine max) is a legume that interacts symbiotically with the soil
      bacterium Bradyrhizobium japonicum to form specialized structures on the roots called nodules where nitrogen fixation occurs. (credit:
      USDA)


        EVERYDAY CONNECTION
        Microbes on the Human Body
        The commensal bacteria that inhabit our skin and gastrointestinal tract do a host of good things for us. They
        protect us from pathogens, help us digest our food, and produce some of our vitamins and other nutrients.
        These activities have been known for a long time. More recently, scientists have gathered evidence that these
        bacteria may also help regulate our moods, influence our activity levels, and even help control weight by
        affecting our food choices and absorption patterns. The Human Microbiome Project has begun the process of
        cataloging our normal bacteria (and archaea) so we can better understand these functions.

        A particularly fascinating example of our normal flora relates to our digestive systems. People who take high
        doses of antibiotics tend to lose many of their normal gut bacteria, allowing a naturally antibiotic-resistant
        species called Clostridium difficile to overgrow and cause severe gastric problems, especially chronic diarrhea
        (Figure 22.28). Obviously, trying to treat this problem with antibiotics only makes it worse. However, it has been
        successfully treated by giving the patients fecal transplants from healthy donors to reestablish the normal
        intestinal microbial community. Clinical trials are underway to ensure the safety and effectiveness of this
        technique.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           22.5 • Beneficial Prokaryotes   593




  FIGURE 22.28 Clostridium difficile. This scanning electron micrograph shows Clostridium difficile, a Gram-positive, rod-shaped
  bacterium that causes severe diarrhea. Infection commonly occurs after the normal gut fauna are eradicated by antibiotics, and in the
  hospital can be deadly to seriously ill patients. (credit: modification of work by CDC, HHS; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

  Scientists are also discovering that the absence of certain key microbes from our intestinal tract may set us up
  for a variety of problems. This seems to be particularly true regarding the appropriate functioning of the immune
  system. There are intriguing findings that suggest that the absence of these microbes is an important contributor
  to the development of allergies and some autoimmune disorders. Research is currently underway to test
  whether adding certain microbes to our internal ecosystem may help in the treatment of these problems, as well
  as in treating some forms of autism.


Early Biotechnology: Cheese, Bread, Wine, Beer, and Yogurt
According to the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity, biotechnology is “any technological application
that uses biological systems, living organisms, or derivatives thereof, to make or modify products or processes for
               5
specific use." The concept of “specific use” involves some sort of commercial application. Genetic engineering,
artificial selection, antibiotic production, and cell culture are current topics of study in biotechnology and will be
described in later chapters. However, humans were using prokaryotes before the term biotechnology was even
coined. Some of the products of this early biotechnology are as familiar as cheese, bread, wine, beer, and yogurt,
which employ both bacteria and other microbes, such as yeast, a fungus (Figure 22.29).




5 http://www.cbd.int/convention/articles/?a=cbd-02 (https://openstax.org/l/UN_convention), United Nations Convention on Biological
Diversity: Article 2: Use of Terms.
594   22 • Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea




      FIGURE 22.29 Some foods produced by microorganisms. Some of the products derived from the use of prokaryotes in early biotechnology
      include (a) cheese, (b) wine, (c) beer and bread, and (d) yogurt. (credit bread: modification of work by F. Rodrigo/Wikimedia Commons;
      credit wine: modification of work by Jon Sullivan; credit beer and bread: modification of work by Kris Miller; credit yogurt: modification of
      work by Jon Sullivan)

      Cheese production began around 4,000 to 7,000 years ago when humans began to breed animals and process their
      milk. Fermentation in this case preserves nutrients: Milk will spoil relatively quickly, but when processed as cheese,
      it is more stable. As for beer, the oldest records of brewing are about 6,000 years old and were an integral part of
      the Sumerian culture. Evidence indicates that the Sumerians discovered fermentation by chance. Wine has been
      produced for about 4,500 years, and evidence suggests that cultured milk products, like yogurt, have existed for at
      least 4,000 years.

      Using Prokaryotes to Clean up Our Planet: Bioremediation
      Microbial bioremediation is the use of prokaryotes (or microbial metabolism) to remove pollutants. Bioremediation
      has been used to remove agricultural chemicals (e.g., pesticides, fertilizers) that leach from soil into groundwater
      and the subsurface. Certain toxic metals and oxides, such as selenium and arsenic compounds, can also be removed
      from water by bioremediation. The reduction of SeO4-2 to SeO3-2 and to Se0 (metallic selenium) is a method used to
      remove selenium ions from water. Mercury (Hg) is an example of a toxic metal that can be removed from an
      environment by bioremediation. As an active ingredient of some pesticides, mercury is used in industry and is also a
      by-product of certain processes, such as battery production. Methyl mercury is usually present in very low
      concentrations in natural environments, but it is highly toxic because it accumulates in living tissues. Several
      species of bacteria can carry out the biotransformation of toxic mercury into nontoxic forms. These bacteria, such as
      Pseudomonas aeruginosa, can convert Hg+2 into Hg0, which is nontoxic to humans.

      One of the most useful and interesting examples of the use of prokaryotes for bioremediation purposes is the
      cleanup of oil spills. The significance of prokaryotes to petroleum bioremediation has been demonstrated in several
      oil spills in recent years, such as the Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska (1989) (Figure 22.30), the Prestige oil spill in Spain
      (2002), the spill into the Mediterranean from a Lebanon power plant (2006), and more recently, the BP oil spill in the
      Gulf of Mexico (2010). In the case of oil spills in the ocean, ongoing natural bioremediation tends to occur, since
      there are oil-consuming bacteria in the ocean prior to the spill. In addition to these naturally occurring oil-degrading



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               22.5 • Beneficial Prokaryotes     595



bacteria, humans select and engineer bacteria that possess the same capability with increased efficacy and
spectrum of hydrocarbon compounds that can be processed. Bioremediation is enhanced by the addition of
inorganic nutrients that help bacteria to grow.

Some hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria feed on hydrocarbons in the oil droplet, breaking down the hydrocarbons into
smaller subunits. Some species, such as Alcanivorax borkumensis, produce surfactants that solubilize the oil
(making it soluble in water), whereas other bacteria degrade the oil into carbon dioxide. Under ideal conditions, it
has been reported that up to 80 percent of the nonvolatile components in oil can be degraded within one year of the
spill. Other oil fractions containing aromatic and highly branched hydrocarbon chains are more difficult to remove
and remain in the environment for longer periods of time.




FIGURE 22.30 Prokaryotes and bioremediation. (a) Cleaning up oil after the Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska, workers hosed oil from beaches
and then used a floating boom to corral the oil, which was finally skimmed from the water surface. Some species of bacteria are able to
solubilize and degrade the oil. (b) One of the most catastrophic consequences of oil spills is the damage to fauna. (credit a: modification of
work by NOAA; credit b: modification of work by GOLUBENKOV, NGO: Saving Taman)
596   22 • Key Terms




Key Terms
acidophile organism with optimal growth pH of three         usually at low incidence, in a population
   or below                                              epidemic disease that occurs in an unusually high
aerobic organisms that use oxygen                           number of individuals in a population at the same
alkaliphile organism with optimal growth pH of nine         time
   or above                                              extremophile organism that grows under extreme or
ammonification process by which ammonia is                  harsh conditions
   released during the decomposition of nitrogen-        foodborne disease any illness resulting from the
   containing organic compounds                             consumption of contaminated food, or of the
anaerobic refers to organisms that grow without             pathogenic bacteria, viruses, or other parasites that
   oxygen                                                   contaminate food
anoxic without oxygen                                    Gram negative bacterium whose cell wall contains
antibiotic biological substance that, in low                little peptidoglycan but has an outer membrane
   concentration, is antagonistic to the growth of       Gram positive bacterium that contains mainly
   prokaryotes                                              peptidoglycan in its cell walls
autotroph organism that produces organic molecules       halophile organism that require a salt concentration
   from small inorganic compounds                           of at least 0.2 M
biofilm microbial community that is held together by     heterotroph organism that obtains energy from
   a gummy-textured matrix                                  organic molecules
biological nitrogen fixation conversion of               hydrothermal vent fissure in Earth’s surface that
   atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia exclusively            releases geothermally heated water
   carried out by prokaryotes                            hyperthermophile organism that grows at
bioremediation use of microbial metabolism to               temperatures between 80–122 °C
   remove pollutants                                     microbial mat multi-layered sheet of prokaryotes
biotechnology any technological application that            that may include bacteria and archaea
   uses living organisms, biological systems, or their   MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus)
   derivatives to produce or modify other products          very dangerous Staphylococcus aureus strain
Black Death devastating pandemic that is believed to        resistant to multiple antibiotics
   have been an outbreak of bubonic plague caused by     nitrification conversion of ammonium into nitrite and
   the bacterium Yersinia pestis                            nitrate in soils
botulism disease produced by the toxin of the            nitrogen fixation process by which gaseous nitrogen
   anaerobic bacterium Clostridium botulinum                is transformed, or “fixed” into more readily available
CA-MRSA MRSA acquired in the community rather               forms such as ammonia
   than in a hospital                                    nodule novel structure on the roots of certain plants
capsule external structure that enables a prokaryote        (legumes) that results from the symbiotic
   to attach to surfaces and protects it from               interaction between the plant and soil bacteria, and
   dehydration                                              is the site of nitrogen fixation
chemotroph organism that obtains energy from             nutrient essential substances for growth, such as
   chemical compounds                                       carbon and nitrogen
conjugation process by which prokaryotes move DNA        osmophile organism that grows in a high sugar
   from one individual to another using a pilus             concentration
cyanobacteria bacteria that evolved from early           pandemic widespread, usually worldwide, epidemic
   phototrophs and oxygenated the atmosphere; also          disease
   known as blue-green algae                             peptidoglycan material composed of polysaccharide
decomposer organism that carries out the                    chains cross-linked to unusual peptides
   decomposition of dead organisms                       phototroph organism that is able to make its own
denitrification transformation of nitrate from soil to      food by converting solar energy to chemical energy
   gaseous nitrogen compounds such as N2O, NO, and       pilus surface appendage of some prokaryotes used
   N2                                                       for attachment to surfaces including other
emerging disease disease making an initial                  prokaryotes
   appearance in a population or that is increasing in   pseudopeptidoglycan component of archaea cell
   incidence or geographic range                            walls that is similar to peptidoglycan in morphology
endemic disease disease that is constantly present,         but contains different sugars



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        22 • Chapter Summary    597



psychrophile organism that grows at temperatures of        teichoic acid polymer associated with the cell wall of
   -15 °C or lower                                            Gram-positive bacteria
radioresistant organism that grows in high levels of       thermophile organism that lives at temperatures
   radiation                                                  between 60–80 °C
resuscitation process by which prokaryotes that are        transduction process by which a bacteriophage
   in the VBNC state return to viability                      moves DNA from one prokaryote to another
S-layer surface-layer protein present on the outside       transformation process by which a prokaryote takes
   of cell walls of archaea and bacteria                      in DNA found in its environment that is shed by
serotype strain of bacterium that carries a set of            other prokaryotes
   similar antigens on its cell surface, often many in a   viable-but-non-culturable (VBNC) state survival
   bacterial species                                          mechanism of bacteria facing environmental stress
stromatolite layered sedimentary structure formed             conditions
   by precipitation of minerals by prokaryotes in          zoonosis disease that primarily infects animals that is
   microbial mats                                             transmitted to humans

Chapter Summary
22.1 Prokaryotic Diversity                                 a single piece of circular DNA in the nucleoid area of
                                                           the cell. Most prokaryotes have a cell wall that lies
Prokaryotes existed for billions of years before plants
                                                           outside the boundary of the plasma membrane. Some
and animals appeared. Hot springs and hydrothermal
                                                           prokaryotes may have additional structures such as a
vents may have been the environments in which life
                                                           capsule, flagella, and pili. Bacteria and Archaea differ
began. Microbial mats are thought to represent the
                                                           in the lipid composition of their cell membranes and
earliest forms of life on Earth. A microbial mat is a
                                                           the characteristics of the cell wall. In archaeal
multi-layered sheet of prokaryotes that grows at
                                                           membranes, phytanyl units, rather than fatty acids, are
interfaces between different types of material, mostly
                                                           linked to glycerol. Some archaeal membranes are lipid
on moist surfaces. Fossilized microbial mats are called
                                                           monolayers instead of bilayers.
stromatolites and consist of laminated organo-
sedimentary structures formed by precipitation of          The cell wall is located outside the cell membrane and
minerals by prokaryotes. They represent the earliest       prevents osmotic lysis. The chemical composition of
fossil record of life on Earth.                            cell walls varies between species. Bacterial cell walls
                                                           contain peptidoglycan. Archaean cell walls do not have
During the first two billion years, the atmosphere was
                                                           peptidoglycan, but they may have
anoxic and only anaerobic organisms were able to live.
                                                           pseudopeptidoglycan, polysaccharides, glycoproteins,
Cyanobacteria evolved from early phototrophs and
                                                           or protein-based cell walls. Bacteria can be divided
began the oxygenation o the atmosphere. The increase
                                                           into two major groups: Gram positive and Gram
in oxygen concentration allowed the evolution of other
                                                           negative, based on the Gram stain reaction. Gram-
life forms.
                                                           positive organisms have a thick peptidoglycan layer
Bacteria and archaea grow in virtually every               fortified with teichoic acids. Gram-negative organisms
environment. Those that survive under extreme              have a thin cell wall and an outer envelope containing
conditions are called extremophiles (extreme lovers).      lipopolysaccharides and lipoproteins.
Some prokaryotes cannot grow in a laboratory setting,
                                                           Prokaryotes can transfer DNA from one cell to another
but they are not dead. They are in the viable-but-non-
                                                           by three mechanisms: transformation (uptake of
culturable (VBNC) state. The VBNC state occurs when
                                                           environmental DNA), transduction (transfer of genomic
prokaryotes enter a dormant state in response to
                                                           DNA via viruses), and conjugation (transfer of DNA by
environmental stressors. Most prokaryotes are colonial
                                                           direct cell contact).
and prefer to live in communities where interactions
take place. A biofilm is a microbial community held        22.3 Prokaryotic Metabolism
together in a gummy-textured matrix.
                                                           As the oldest living inhabitants of Earth, prokaryotes
22.2 Structure of Prokaryotes: Bacteria and                are also the most metabolically diverse; they flourish in
Archaea                                                    many different environments with various energy and
                                                           carbon sources, variable temperature, pH, pressure,
Prokaryotes (domains Archaea and Bacteria) are             oxygen and water availability. Nutrients required in
single-celled organisms that lack a nucleus. They have     large amounts are called macronutrients, whereas
598   22 • Visual Connection Questions



those required in trace amounts are called                    food, pathogenic bacteria, viruses, or parasites.
micronutrients or trace elements. Macronutrients
                                                              Some bacterial infections have been associated with
include C, H, O, N, P, S, K, Mg, Ca, and Na. In addition to
                                                              biofilms: Legionnaires’ disease, otitis media, and
these macronutrients, prokaryotes require various
                                                              infection of patients with cystic fibrosis. Biofilms can
metallic elements for growth and enzyme function.
                                                              grow on human tissues, like dental plaque; colonize
Prokaryotes use different sources of energy to
                                                              medical devices; and cause infection or produce
assemble macromolecules from smaller molecules.
                                                              foodborne disease by growing on the surfaces of food
Phototrophs obtain their energy from sunlight, whereas
                                                              and food-processing equipment. Biofilms are resistant
chemotrophs obtain energy from chemical compounds.
                                                              to most of the methods used to control microbial
Energy-producing pathways may be either aerobic or
                                                              growth. The excessive use of antibiotics has resulted in
anaerobic.
                                                              a major global problem, since resistant forms of
Prokaryotes play roles in the carbon and nitrogen             bacteria have been selected over time. A very
cycles. Producers capture carbon dioxide from the             dangerous strain, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
atmosphere and convert it to organic compounds.               aureus (MRSA), has wreaked havoc recently across the
Consumers (animals and other chemoorganotrophic               world.
organisms) use organic compounds generated by
producers and release carbon dioxide into the
                                                              22.5 Beneficial Prokaryotes
atmosphere by respiration. Carbon dioxide is also             Pathogens are only a small percentage of all
returned to the atmosphere by the microbial                   prokaryotes. In fact, prokaryotes provide essential
decomposers of dead organisms. Nitrogen also cycles           services to humans and other organisms. Nitrogen,
in and out of living organisms, from organic compounds        which is not usable by eukaryotes in its plentiful
to ammonia, ammonium ions, nitrite, nitrate, and              atmospheric form, can be “fixed,” or converted into
nitrogen gas. Prokaryotes are essential for most of           ammonia (NH3) either biologically or abiotically.
these conversions. Gaseous nitrogen is transformed            Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) is exclusively carried
into ammonia through nitrogen fixation. Ammonia is            out by prokaryotes, and constitutes the second most
anaerobically catabolized by some prokaryotes,                important biological process on Earth. Although some
yielding N2 as the final product. Nitrification is the        terrestrial nitrogen is fixed by free-living bacteria, most
conversion of ammonium into nitrite. Nitrification in         BNF comes from the symbiotic interaction between soil
soils is carried out by bacteria. Denitrification is also     rhizobia and the roots of legume plants.
performed by bacteria and transforms nitrate from
                                                              Human life is only possible due to the action of
soils into gaseous nitrogen compounds, such as N2O,
                                                              microbes, both those in the environment and those
NO, and N2.
                                                              species that call us home. Internally, they help us
22.4 Bacterial Diseases in Humans                             digest our food, produce vital nutrients for us, protect
                                                              us from pathogenic microbes, and help train our
Some prokaryotes are human pathogens. Devastating
                                                              immune systems to function properly.
diseases and plagues have been among us since early
times and remain among the leading causes of death            Microbial bioremediation is the use of microbial
worldwide. Emerging diseases are those rapidly                metabolism to remove pollutants. Bioremediation has
increasing in incidence or geographic range. They can         been used to remove agricultural chemicals that leach
be new or re-emerging diseases (previously under              from soil into groundwater and the subsurface. Toxic
control). Many emerging diseases affecting humans             metals and oxides, such as selenium and arsenic
originate in animals (zoonoses), such as brucellosis. A       compounds, can also be removed by bioremediation.
group of re-emerging bacterial diseases recently              Probably one of the most useful and interesting
identified by WHO for monitoring include bubonic              examples of the use of prokaryotes for bioremediation
plague, diphtheria, and cholera. Foodborne diseases           purposes is the cleanup of oil spills.
result from the consumption of food contaminated with

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 22.8 Compared to free-floating bacteria,            2. Figure 22.16 Which of the following statements
      bacteria in biofilms often show increased                     is true?
      resistance to antibiotics and detergents. Why do                 a. Gram-positive bacteria have a single cell
      you think this might be the case?                                    wall anchored to the cell membrane by




Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   22 • Review Questions    599



         lipoteichoic acid.                                 about the nitrogen cycle is false?
      b. Porins allow entry of substances into both           a. Nitrogen fixing bacteria exist on the root
         Gram-positive and Gram-negative                         nodules of legumes and in the soil.
         bacteria.                                            b. Denitrifying bacteria convert nitrates
      c. The cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria is              (NO3-) into nitrogen gas (N2).
         thick, and the cell wall of Gram-positive            c. Ammonification is the process by which
         bacteria is thin.                                       ammonium ion (NH4+) is released from
      d. Gram-negative bacteria have a cell wall                 decomposing organic compounds.
         made of peptidoglycan, whereas Gram-                 d. Nitrification is the process by which
         positive bacteria have a cell wall made of              nitrites (NO2-) are converted to
         lipoteichoic acid.                                      ammonium ion (NH4+).

 3. Figure 22.19 Which of the following statements

Review Questions
 4. The first forms of life on Earth were thought to             prokaryotes.
    be_________.                                              d. Pathogenic bacteria can grow as free
      a. single-celled plants                                    bacteria, but non-pathogenic bacteria only
      b. prokaryotes                                             grow as parts of large colonies.
      c. insects
      d. large animals such as dinosaurs                 9. The presence of a membrane-enclosed nucleus
                                                            is a characteristic of ________.
 5. Microbial mats __________.                                 a. prokaryotic cells
      a. are the earliest forms of life on Earth               b. eukaryotic cells
      b. obtained their energy and food from                   c. all cells
         hydrothermal vents                                    d. viruses
      c. are multi-layered sheets of prokaryotes
         including mostly bacteria but also archaea     10. Which of the following consist of prokaryotic
     d. all of the above                                    cells?
                                                              a. bacteria and fungi
 6. The first organisms that oxygenated the                   b. archaea and fungi
    atmosphere were                                           c. protists and animals
      a. cyanobacteria                                        d. bacteria and archaea
      b. phototrophic organisms
      c. anaerobic organisms                            11. The cell wall is ________.
      d. all of the above                                     a. interior to the cell membrane
                                                              b. exterior to the cell membrane
 7. Halophiles are organisms that require________.            c. a part of the cell membrane
     a. a salt concentration of at least 0.2 M                d. interior or exterior, depending on the
     b. high sugar concentration                                 particular cell
      c. the addition of halogens
     d. all of the above                                12. Organisms most likely to be found in extreme
                                                            environments are ________.
 8. Many of the first prokaryotes to be cultured in a         a. fungi
    scientific lab were human or animal pathogens.            b. bacteria
    Why would these species be more readily                   c. viruses
    cultured than non-pathogenic prokaryotes?                 d. archaea
      a. Pathogenic prokaryotes are hardier than
          non-pathogenic prokaryotes.                   13. Prokaryotes stain as Gram-positive or Gram-
      b. Non-pathogenic prokaryotes require more            negative because of differences in the cell
          supplements in their growth media.                _______.
      c. Most of the necessary culture conditions             a. wall
          could be inferred for pathogenic                    b. cytoplasm
600   22 • Review Questions



         c. nucleus                                           a.   photolithotrophs
         d. chromosome                                        b.   photoautotrophs
                                                              c.   chemolithoautotrophs
  14. Pseudopeptidoglycan is a characteristic of the          d.   chemo-organotrophs
      walls of ________.
        a. eukaryotic cells                             21. A disease that is constantly present in a
        b. bacterial prokaryotic cells                      population is called _____.
        c. archaean prokaryotic cells                         a. pandemic
        d. bacterial and archaean prokaryotic cells           b. epidemic
                                                              c. endemic
  15. The lipopolysaccharide layer (LPS) is a                 d. re-emerging
      characteristic of the wall of ________.
        a. archaean cells                               22. Which of the statements about biofilms is
        b. Gram-negative bacteria                           correct?
        c. bacterial prokaryotic cells                        a. Biofilms are considered responsible for
        d. eukaryotic cells                                       diseases such as cystic fibrosis.
                                                              b. Biofilms produce dental plaque, and
  16. Which of the following elements is not a                    colonize catheters and prostheses.
      micronutrient?                                          c. Biofilms colonize open wounds and
       a. boron                                                   burned tissue.
       b. calcium                                             d. All statements are correct.
        c. chromium
       d. manganese                                     23. Which of these statements is true?
                                                             a. An antibiotic is any substance produced by
  17. Prokaryotes that obtain their energy from                  an organism that is antagonistic to the
      chemical compounds are called _____.                       growth of prokaryotes.
        a. phototrophs                                       b. An antibiotic is any substance produced by
        b. auxotrophs                                            a prokaryote that is antagonistic to the
        c. chemotrophs                                           growth of other viruses.
        d. lithotrophs                                       c. An antibiotic is any substance produced by
                                                                 a prokaryote that is antagonistic to the
  18. Ammonification is the process by which _____.              growth of eukaryotic cells.
       a. ammonia is released during the                     d. An antibiotic is any substance produced by
          decomposition of nitrogen-containing                   a prokaryote that prevents growth of the
          organic compounds                                      same prokaryote.
       b. ammonium is converted to nitrite and
          nitrate in soils                              24. A person in England arrives at a medical clinic
       c. nitrate from soil is transformed to gaseous       with a fever and swollen lymph nodes shortly
          nitrogen compounds such as NO, N2O, and           after returning from a visit to New Mexico. For
          N2                                                which bacteria should the doctor test the
       d. gaseous nitrogen is fixed to yield ammonia        patient?
                                                              a. Salmonella enterica
  19. Plants use carbon dioxide from the air and are          b. Borrelia burgdorferi
      therefore called _____.                                 c. Clostridium botulinum
        a. consumers                                          d. Yersinia pestis
        b. producers
        c. decomposer                                   25. MRSA has emerged as a serious infectious
        d. carbon fixers                                    disease, with the first case of methicillin-
                                                            resistant S. aureus being detected in 1961. Why
  20. Cyanobacteria harness energy from the sun             are medical professionals so concerned when
      through photosynthesis, and oxidize water to          antibiotics exist that can kill MRSA?
      provide electrons for energy generation. Thus,          a. MRSA can transfer methicillin-resistance
      we classify cyanobacteria as _________.                     to other bacteria.



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                22 • Critical Thinking Questions   601



        b. Patients are not treated with correct                   a.   pesticides
           antibiotics rapidly enough to prevent                   b.   bioremediators
           serious illness.                                        c.   recalcitrant compounds
        c. MRSA could acquire additional antibiotic                d.   xenobiotics
           resistance genes from other bacteria to
           become a “super bug.”                            28. Bioremediation includes _____.
        d. All of the above.                                      a. the use of prokaryotes that can fix nitrogen
                                                                  b. the use of prokaryotes to clean up
 26. Which of these occurs through symbiotic                         pollutants
     nitrogen fixation?                                           c. the use of prokaryotes as natural fertilizers
       a. The plant benefits from using an endless                d. All of the above
           source of nitrogen.
       b. The soil benefits from being naturally            29. In addition to providing yogurt with its unique
           fertilized.                                          flavor and texture, lactic acid-producing bacteria
        c. Bacteria benefit from using                          also provide which additional benefit during food
           photosynthates from the plant.                       production?
       d. All of the above occur.                                  a. Providing xenobiotics
                                                                   b. Lowering the pH to kill pathogenic bacteria
 27. Synthetic compounds found in an organism but                  c. Pasteurizing milk products
     not normally produced or expected to be                       d. Breaking down lactose for lactose-
     present in that organism are called _____.                        intolerant individuals


Critical Thinking Questions
 30. Describe briefly how you would detect the                   vent. What type of prokaryotes, in terms of their
     presence of a non-culturable prokaryote in an               metabolic needs (autotrophs, phototrophs,
     environmental sample.                                       chemotrophs, etc.), would you expect to find
                                                                 there?
 31. Why do scientists believe that the first
     organisms on Earth were extremophiles?                 37. Farmers continually rotate the crops grown in
                                                                different fields to maintain nutrients in the soil.
 32. A new bacterial species is discovered and
                                                                How would planting soybeans in a field the year
     classified as an endolith, an extremophile that
                                                                after the field was used to grow carrots help
     lives inside rock. If the bacteria were discovered
                                                                maintain nitrogen in the soil?
     in the permafrost of Antarctica, describe two
     extremophile features the bacteria must                38. Imagine a region of soil became contaminated,
     possess.                                                   killing bacteria that decompose dead plants and
                                                                animals. How would this effect the carbon cycle
 33. Mention three differences between bacteria and
                                                                in the area? Be specific in stating where carbon
     archaea.
                                                                would accumulate in the cycle.
 34. Explain the statement that both types, bacteria
                                                            39. Explain the reason why the imprudent and
     and archaea, have the same basic structures,
                                                                excessive use of antibiotics has resulted in a
     but built from different chemical components.
                                                                major global problem.
 35. A scientist isolates a new species of prokaryote.
                                                            40. Researchers have discovered that washing
     They note that the specimen is a bacillus with a
                                                                spinach with water several times does not
     lipid bilayer and cell wall that stains positive for
                                                                prevent foodborne diseases due to E. coli. How
     peptidoglycan. Its circular chromosome
                                                                can you explain this fact?
     replicates from a single origin of replication. Is
     the specimen most likely an Archaea, a Gram-           41. Your friend believes that prokaryotes are always
     positive bacterium, or a Gram-negative                     detrimental and pathogenic. How would you
     bacterium? How do you know?                                explain to them that they are wrong?

 36. Think about the conditions (temperature, light,        42. Many people use antimicrobial soap to kill
     pressure, and organic and inorganic materials)             bacteria on their hands. However, overuse may
     that you may find in a deep-sea hydrothermal               actually increase the risk of infection. How could
602   22 • Critical Thinking Questions



       this occur?




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 23
Protists




FIGURE 23.1 Protists range from the microscopic, single-celled (a) Acanthocystis turfacea and the (b) ciliate
Tetrahymena thermophila, both visualized here using light microscopy, to the enormous, multicellular (c) kelps
(Chromalveolata) that extend for hundreds of feet in underwater “forests.” (credit a: modification of work by Yuiuji
Tsukii; credit b: modification of work by Richard Robinson, Public Library of Science; credit c: modification of work by
Kip Evans, NOAA; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)


CHAPTER OUTLINE
23.1 Eukaryotic Origins
23.2 Characteristics of Protists
23.3 Groups of Protists
23.4 Ecology of Protists


INTRODUCTION Humans have been familiar with macroscopic organisms (organisms big enough
to see with the unaided eye) since before there was a written history, and it is likely that most
cultures distinguished between animals and land plants, and most probably included the
macroscopic fungi as plants. Therefore, it became an interesting challenge to deal with the world
of microorganisms once microscopes were developed a few centuries ago. Many different naming
schemes were used over the last couple of centuries, but it has become the most common
practice to refer to eukaryotes that are not land plants, animals, or fungi as protists.

This name was first suggested by Ernst Haeckel in the late nineteenth century. It has been applied
in many contexts and has been formally used to represent a kingdom-level taxon called Protista.
However, many modern systematists (biologists who study the relationships among organisms)
are beginning to shy away from the idea of formal ranks such as kingdom and phylum. Instead,
they are naming taxa as groups of organisms thought to include all the descendants of a last
common ancestor (monophyletic group). During the past two decades, the field of molecular
genetics has demonstrated that some protists are more related to animals, plants, or fungi than
they are to other protists. Therefore, not including animals, plants, and fungi make the kingdom
Protista a paraphyletic group, or one that does not include all descendents of its common
ancestor. For this reason, protist lineages originally classified into the kingdom Protista continue to
be examined and debated. In the meantime, the term “protist” still is used informally to describe
this tremendously diverse group of eukaryotes.

Most protists are microscopic, unicellular organisms that are abundant in soil, freshwater,
brackish, and marine environments. They are also common in the digestive tracts of animals and
in the vascular tissues of plants. Others invade the cells of other protists, animals, and plants. Not
all protists are microscopic. Some have huge, macroscopic cells, such as the plasmodia (giant
amoebae) of myxomycete slime molds or the marine green alga Caulerpa, which can have single
604   23 • Protists



      cells that can be several meters in size. Some protists are multicellular, such as the red, green, and
      brown seaweeds. It is among the protists that one finds the wealth of ways that organisms can
      grow.

      23.1 Eukaryotic Origins
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • List the unifying characteristics of eukaryotes
         • Describe what scientists know about the origins of eukaryotes based on the last common
            ancestor
         • Explain the endosymbiotic theory

      Organisms are classified into three domains: Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya. The first two
      lineages comprise all prokaryotic cells, and the third contains all eukaryotes. A very sparse fossil
      record prevents us from determining what the first members of each of these lineages looked like,
      so it is possible that all the events that led to the last common ancestor of extant eukaryotes will
      remain unknown. However, comparative biology of extant (living) organisms and the limited fossil
      record provide some insight into the evolution of Eukarya.

      The earliest fossils found appear to be those of domain Bacteria. They are about 3.5 to 3.8 billion
      years old and are recognizable because of their relatively complex structure and, for prokaryotes,
      relatively large cells. Most other prokaryotes have small cells, 1 or 2 µm in size, and would be
      difficult to pick out as fossils. Fossil stromatolites suggest that at least some prokaryotes lived in
      interactive communities, and evidence from the structure of living eukaryotic cells suggests that it
      was similar ancestral interactions that gave rise to the eukaryotes. Most living eukaryotes have
      cells measuring 10 µm or greater. Structures this size, which might be fossilized remains of early
      eukaryotes, appear in the geological record in deposits dating to about 2.1 billion years ago.

      Characteristics of Eukaryotes
      Data from these fossils, as well as from the study of living genomes, have led comparative
      biologists to conclude that living eukaryotes are all descendants of a single common ancestor.
      Mapping the characteristics found in all major groups of eukaryotes reveals that the following
      characteristics are present in at least some of the members of each major lineage, or during some
      part of their life cycle, and therefore must have been present in the last common ancestor.

        1. Cells with nuclei surrounded by a nuclear envelope with nuclear pores: This is the single
           characteristic that is both necessary and sufficient to define an organism as a eukaryote. All
           extant eukaryotes have cells with nuclei.
        2. Mitochondria: Most extant eukaryotes have "typical" mitochondria, although some
           eukaryotes have very reduced mitochondrial “remnants” and a few lack detectable
           mitochondria.
        3. Cytoskeleton of microtubules and microfilaments: Eukaryotic cells possess the structural
           and motility components called actin microfilaments and microtubules. All extant
           eukaryotes have these cytoskeletal elements.
        4. Flagella and cilia: Organelles associated with cell motility. Some extant eukaryotes lack
           flagella and/or cilia, but their presence in related lineages suggests that they are descended
           from ancestors that possessed these organelles.
        5. Chromosomes organized by histones: Each eukaryotic chromosome consists of a linear
           DNA molecule coiled around basic (alkaline) proteins called histones. The few eukaryotes
           with chromosomes lacking histones clearly evolved from ancestors that had them.
        6. Mitosis: A process of nuclear division in which replicated chromosomes are divided and
           separated using elements of the cytoskeleton. Mitosis is universally present in eukaryotes.
        7. Sexual reproduction: A meiotic process of nuclear division and genetic recombination
           unique to eukaryotes. During this process, diploid nuclei at one stage of the life cycle
           undergo meiosis to yield haploid nuclei, which subsequently fuse together (karyogamy) to


      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 23.1 • Eukaryotic Origins   605



     create a diploid zygote nucleus.
  8. Cell walls: It might be reasonable to conclude that the last common ancestor could make cell walls during
     some stage of its life cycle, simply because cell walls were present in their prokaryote precursors. However,
     not enough is known about eukaryotes’ cell walls and their development to know how much homology exists
     between those of prokaryotes and eukaryotes. If the last common ancestor could make cell walls, it is clear
     that this ability must have been lost in many groups.

Endosymbiosis and the Evolution of Eukaryotes
Before we discuss the origins of eukaryotes, it is first important to understand that all extant eukaryotes are likely
the descendants of a chimera-like organism that was a composite of a host cell and the cell(s) of an alpha-
proteobacterium that “took up residence” inside it. This major theme in the origin of eukaryotes is known as
endosymbiosis, one cell engulfing another such that the engulfed cell survives and both cells benefit. Over many
generations, a symbiotic relationship can result in two organisms that depend on each other so completely that
neither could survive on its own. Endosymbiotic events likely contributed to the origin of the last common ancestor
of today’s eukaryotes and to later diversification in certain lineages of eukaryotes (Figure 23.5). Similar
endosymbiotic associations are not uncommon in living eukaryotes. Before explaining this further, it is necessary to
consider metabolism in prokaryotes.

Prokaryotic Metabolism
Many important metabolic processes arose in prokaryotes; however, some of these processes, such as nitrogen
fixation, are never found in eukaryotes. The process of aerobic respiration is found in all major lineages of
eukaryotes, and it is localized in the mitochondria. Aerobic respiration is also found in many lineages of prokaryotes,
but it is not present in all of them, and a great deal of evidence suggests that such anaerobic prokaryotes never
carried out aerobic respiration nor did their ancestors.

While today’s atmosphere is about 20 percent molecular oxygen (O2), geological evidence shows that it originally
lacked O2. Without oxygen, aerobic respiration would not be expected, and living things would have relied on
anaerobic respiration or the process of fermentation instead. At some point between 3.2 and 3.5 billion years ago,
some prokaryotes began using energy from sunlight to power anabolic processes that reduce carbon dioxide to form
organic compounds. That is, they evolved the ability to photosynthesize. Hydrogen, derived from various sources,
was “captured” using light-powered reactions to reduce fixed carbon dioxide in the Calvin cycle. The group of Gram-
negative bacteria that gave rise to cyanobacteria used water as the hydrogen source and released O2 as a “waste”
product about 2.2 billion years ago.

Eventually, the amount of photosynthetic oxygen built up in some environments to levels that posed a risk to living
organisms, since it can damage many organic compounds. Various metabolic processes evolved that protected
organisms from oxygen, one of which, aerobic respiration, also generated high levels of ATP. It became widely
present among prokaryotes, including in a free-living group we now call alpha-proteobacteria. Organisms that did
not acquire aerobic respiration had to remain in oxygen-free environments. Originally, oxygen-rich environments
were likely localized around places where cyanobacteria were abundant and active, but by about 2 billion years ago,
geological evidence shows that oxygen was building up to higher concentrations in the atmosphere. Oxygen levels
similar to today’s levels only arose within the last 700 million years.

Recall that the first fossils that we believe to be eukaryotes date to about 2 billion years old, so they seemed to have
evolved and diversified rapidly as oxygen levels were increasing. Also, recall that all extant eukaryotes descended
from an ancestor with mitochondria. These organelles were first observed by light microscopists in the late 1800s,
where they appeared to be somewhat worm-shaped structures that seemed to be moving around in the cell. Some
early observers suggested that they might be bacteria living inside host cells, but these hypotheses remained
unknown or rejected in most scientific communities.

Endosymbiotic Theory
As cell biology developed in the twentieth century, it became clear that mitochondria were the organelles
responsible for producing ATP using aerobic respiration, in which oxygen was the final electron acceptor. In the
1960s, American biologist Lynn Margulis of Boston University developed the endosymbiotic theory, which states
that eukaryotes may have been a product of one cell engulfing another, one living within another, and coevolving
over time until the separate cells were no longer recognizable as such and shared genetic control of a mutualistic
606   23 • Protists



      metabolic pathway to produce ATP. In 1967, Margulis introduced new data to support her work on the theory and
      substantiated her findings through microbiological evidence. Although Margulis’s work initially was met with
      resistance, this basic component of this once-revolutionary hypothesis is now widely accepted, with work
      progressing on uncovering the steps involved in this evolutionary process and the key players involved.

      While the metabolic organelles and genes responsible for many energy-harvesting processes appear to have had
      their origins in bacteria, our nuclear genes and the molecular machinery responsible for replication and expression
      appear to be more closely related to those found in the Archaea. Much remains to be clarified about how this
      relationship occurred; this continues to be an exciting field of discovery in biology. For instance, it is not known
      whether the endosymbiotic event that led to mitochondria occurred before or after the host cell had a nucleus. Such
      organisms would be among the extinct precursors of the last common ancestor of eukaryotes.

      Mitochondria
      One of the major features distinguishing prokaryotes from eukaryotes is the presence of mitochondria, or their
      reduced derivatives, in virtually all eukaryotic cells. Eukaryotic cells may contain anywhere from one to several
      thousand mitochondria, depending on the cell’s level of energy consumption, in humans being most abundant in the
      liver and skeletal muscles. Each mitochondrion measures 1 to 10 or greater micrometers in length and exists in the
      cell as an organelle that can be ovoid to worm-shaped to intricately branched (Figure 23.2). However, although they
      may have originated as free-living aerobic organisms, mitochondria can no longer survive and reproduce outside the
      cell.

      Mitochondria have several features that suggest their relationship to alpha-proteobacteria (Figure 23.5). Alpha-
      proteobacteria are a large group of bacteria that includes species symbiotic with plants, disease organisms that can
      infect humans via ticks, and many free-living species that use light for energy. Mitochondria have their own
      genomes, with a circular chromosome stabilized by attachments to the inner membrane. Mitochondria also have
      special ribosomes and transfer RNAs that resemble these same components in prokaryotes. An intriguing feature of
      mitochondria is that many of them exhibit minor differences from the universal genetic code. However, many of the
      genes for respiratory proteins are now relocated in the nucleus. When these genes are compared to those of other
      organisms, they appear to be of alpha-proteobacterial origin. In some eukaryotic groups, such genes are found in
      the mitochondria, whereas in other groups, they are found in the nucleus. This has been interpreted as evidence
      that over evolutionary time, genes have been transferred from the endosymbiont chromosome to those of the host
      genome. This apparent “loss” of genes by the endosymbiont is probably one explanation why mitochondria cannot
      live without a host.

      Another line of evidence supporting the idea that mitochondria were derived by endosymbiosis comes from the
      structure of the mitochondrion itself. Most mitochondria are shaped like alpha-proteobacteria and are surrounded
      by two membranes; the inner membrane is bacterial in nature whereas the outer membrane is eukaryotic in nature.
      This is exactly what one would expect if one membrane-bound organism was engulfed into a vacuole by another
      membrane-bound organism. The outer mitochondrial membrane was derived by the enclosing vesicle, while the
      inner membrane was derived from the plasma membrane of the endosymbiont. The mitochondrial inner membrane
      is extensive and involves substantial infoldings called cristae that resemble the textured, outer surface of alpha-
      proteobacteria. The matrix and inner membrane are rich with the enzymes necessary for aerobic respiration.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                23.1 • Eukaryotic Origins   607




FIGURE 23.2 Mitochondria. In this transmission electron micrograph of mitochondria in a mammalian lung cell, the cristae, infoldings of
the mitochondrial inner membrane, can be seen in cross-section. (credit: Louise Howard)

The third line of evidence comes from the production of new mitochondria. Mitochondria divide independently by a
process that resembles binary fission in prokaryotes. Mitochondria arise only from previous mitochondria; they are
not formed from scratch (de novo) by the eukaryotic cell. Mitochondria may fuse together; and they may be moved
around inside the cell by interactions with the cytoskeleton. They reproduce within their enclosing cell and are
distributed with the cytoplasm when a cell divides or two cells fuse. Therefore, although these organelles are highly
integrated into the eukaryotic cell, they still reproduce as if they were independent organisms within the cell.
However, their reproduction is synchronized with the activity and division of the cell. These features all support the
theory that mitochondria were once free-living prokaryotes.

Some living eukaryotes are anaerobic and cannot survive in the presence of too much oxygen. However, a few
appear to lack organelles that could be recognized as mitochondria. In the 1970s and on into the early 1990s, many
biologists suggested that some of these eukaryotes were descended from ancestors whose lineages had diverged
from the lineage of mitochondrion-containing eukaryotes before endosymbiosis occurred. Later findings suggest
that reduced organelles are found in most, if not all, anaerobic eukaryotes, and that virtually all eukaryotes appear
to carry some genes in their nuclei that are of mitochondrial origin.

In addition to the aerobic generation of ATP, mitochondria have several other metabolic functions. One of these
functions is to generate clusters of iron and sulfur that are important cofactors of many enzymes. Such functions are
often associated with the reduced mitochondrion-derived organelles of anaerobic eukaryotes. The protist
Monocercomonoides, an inhabitant of vertebrate digestive tracts, appears to be an exception; it has no mitochondria
and its genome contains neither genes derived from mitochondria nor nuclear genes related to mitochondrial
maintenance. However, it is related to other protists with reduced mitochondria and probably represents an end-
point in mitochondrial reduction. Although most biologists accept that the last common ancestor of eukaryotes had
mitochondria, it appears that the complex relationship between mitochondria and their host cell continues to
evolve.

Plastids
Some groups of eukaryotes are photosynthetic. Their cells contain, in addition to the standard eukaryotic organelles,
another kind of organelle called a plastid. When such cells are carrying out photosynthesis, their plastids are rich in
the pigment chlorophyll a and a range of other pigments, called accessory pigments, which are involved in
harvesting energy from light. Photosynthetic plastids are called chloroplasts (Figure 23.3).
608   23 • Protists




      FIGURE 23.3 Chloroplasts. (a) This chloroplast cross-section illustrates its elaborate inner membrane organization. Stacks of thylakoid
      membranes compartmentalize photosynthetic enzymes and provide scaffolding for chloroplast DNA. (b) In this micrograph of Elodea sp.,
      the chloroplasts can be seen as small green spheres. (credit b: modification of work by Brandon Zierer; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

      Like mitochondria, plastids appear to have an endosymbiotic origin. This hypothesis was also proposed and
      championed with the first direct evidence by Lynn Margulis. We now know that plastids are derived from
      cyanobacteria that lived inside the cells of an ancestral, aerobic, heterotrophic eukaryote. This is called primary
      endosymbiosis, and plastids of primary origin are surrounded by two membranes. However, the best evidence is
      that the acquisition of cyanobacterial endosymbionts has happened twice in the history of eukaryotes. In one case,
      the common ancestor of the major lineage/supergroup Archaeplastida took on a cyanobacterial endosymbiont; in
      the other, the ancestor of the small amoeboid rhizarian taxon, Paulinella, took on a different cyanobacterial
      endosymbiont. Almost all photosynthetic eukaryotes are descended from the first event, and only a couple of
      species are derived from the other, which in evolutionary terms, appears to be more recent.

      Cyanobacteria are a group of Gram-negative bacteria with all the conventional structures of the group. However,
      unlike most prokaryotes, they have extensive, internal membrane-bound sacs called thylakoids. Chlorophyll is a
      component of these membranes, as are many of the proteins of the light reactions of photosynthesis. Cyanobacteria
      also have the peptidoglycan wall and lipopolysaccharide layer associated with Gram-negative bacteria.

      Chloroplasts of primary endosymbiotic origin have thylakoids, a circular DNA chromosome, and ribosomes similar to
      those of cyanobacteria. As in mitochondria, each chloroplast is surrounded by two membranes. The outer
      membrane is thought to be derived from the enclosing vacuole of the host, and the inner membrane is thought to be
      derived from the plasma membrane of the cyanobacterial endosymbiont. In the group of Archaeplastida called the
      glaucophytes and in the rhizarian Paulinella, a thin peptidoglycan layer is still present between the outer and inner
      plastid membranes. All other plastids lack this relict of the cyanobacterial wall.

      There is also, as with the case of mitochondria, strong evidence that many of the genes of the endosymbiont were
      transferred to the nucleus. Plastids, like mitochondria, cannot live independently outside the host. In addition, like
      mitochondria, plastids are derived from the division of other plastids and never built from scratch. Researchers have
      suggested that the endosymbiotic event that led to Archaeplastida occurred 1 to 1.5 billion years ago, at least 5
      hundred million years after the fossil record suggests that eukaryotes were present.

      Not all plastids in eukaryotes are derived directly from primary endosymbiosis. Some of the major groups of algae
      became photosynthetic by secondary endosymbiosis, that is, by taking in either green algae or red algae (both from
      Archaeplastida) as endosymbionts (Figure 23.4). Numerous microscopic and genetic studies have supported this
      conclusion. Secondary plastids are surrounded by three or more membranes, and some secondary plastids even
      have clear remnants of the nucleus (nucleomorphs) of endosymbiotic algae. There are even cases where tertiary or
      higher-order endosymbiotic events are the best explanations for the features of some eukaryotic plastids.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                23.1 • Eukaryotic Origins    609




FIGURE 23.4 Algae. (a) Red algae and (b) green algae (seen here by light microscopy) share similar DNA sequences with photosynthetic
cyanobacteria. Scientists speculate that, in a process called endosymbiosis, an ancestral prokaryote engulfed a photosynthetic
cyanobacterium that evolved into modern-day chloroplasts. (credit a: modification of work by Ed Bierman; credit b: modification of work by
G. Fahnenstiel, NOAA; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)



        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 23.5 The Endosymbiotic Theory. The first eukaryote may have originated from an ancestral prokaryote that had undergone
membrane proliferation, compartmentalization of cellular function (into a nucleus, lysosomes, and an endoplasmic reticulum), and the
establishment of endosymbiotic relationships with an aerobic prokaryote, and, in some cases, a photosynthetic prokaryote, to form
mitochondria and chloroplasts, respectively.

What evidence is there that mitochondria were incorporated into the ancestral eukaryotic cell before chloroplasts?



        EVOLUTION CONNECTION

Secondary Endosymbiosis in Chlorarachniophytes
Endosymbiosis involves one cell engulfing another to produce, over time, a coevolved relationship in which neither
cell could survive alone. The chloroplasts of red and green algae, for instance, are derived from the engulfment of a
photosynthetic cyanobacterium by an ancestral prokaryote.

This evidence suggests the possibility that an ancestral cell (already containing a photosynthetic endosymbiont) was
engulfed by another eukaryote cell, resulting in a secondary endosymbiosis. Molecular and morphological evidence
610   23 • Protists



      suggest that the chlorarachniophyte protists are derived from a secondary endosymbiotic event.
      Chlorarachniophytes are rare algae indigenous to tropical seas and sand. They are classified into the Rhizarian
      supergroup. Chlorarachniophytes are reticulose amoebae, extending thin cytoplasmic strands that interconnect
      them with other chlorarachniophytes in a cytoplasmic network. These protists are thought to have originated when a
      eukaryote engulfed a green alga, the latter of which had previously established an endosymbiotic relationship with a
      photosynthetic cyanobacterium (Figure 23.6).




      FIGURE 23.6 Secondary endosymbiosis. The hypothesized process of several endosymbiotic events leading to the evolution of
      chlorarachniophytes is shown. In a primary endosymbiotic event, a heterotrophic eukaryote consumed a cyanobacterium. In a secondary
      endosymbiotic event, the cell resulting from primary endosymbiosis was consumed by a second cell. The resulting organelle became a
      plastid in modern chlorarachniophytes.

      Several lines of evidence support that chlorarachniophytes evolved from secondary endosymbiosis. The
      chloroplasts contained within the green algal endosymbionts still are capable of photosynthesis, making
      chlorarachniophytes photosynthetic. The green algal endosymbiont also exhibits a vestigial nucleus. In fact, it
      appears that chlorarachniophytes are the products of an evolutionarily recent secondary endosymbiotic event. The
      plastids of chlorarachniophytes are surrounded by four membranes: The first two correspond to the inner and outer
      membranes of the photosynthetic cyanobacterium, the third corresponds to plasma membrane of the green alga,
      and the fourth corresponds to the vacuole that surrounded the green alga when it was engulfed by the
      chlorarachniophyte ancestor. In other lineages that involved secondary endosymbiosis, only three membranes can
      be identified around plastids. This is currently interpreted as a sequential loss of a membrane during the course of
      evolution.

      The process of secondary endosymbiosis is not unique to chlorarachniophytes. Secondary plastids are also found in
      the Excavates and the Chromalveolates. In the Excavates, secondary endosymbiosis of green algae led to euglenid
      protists, while in the Chromalveolates, secondary endosymbiosis of red algae led to the evolution of plastids in
      dinoflagellates, apicomplexans, and stramenopiles.


      23.2 Characteristics of Protists
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe the cell structure characteristics of protists
         • Describe the metabolic diversity of protists
         • Describe the life cycle diversity of protists

      There are over 100,000 described living species of protists, and it is unclear how many undescribed species may
      exist. Since many protists live as commensals or parasites in other organisms and these relationships are often
      species-specific, there is a huge potential for protist diversity that matches the diversity of their hosts. Because the
      name "protist" serves as a catchall term for eukaryotic organisms that are not animal, plant, or fungi, it is not
      surprising that very few characteristics are common to all protists. On the other hand, familiar characteristics of
      plants and animals are foreshadowed in various protists.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         23.2 • Characteristics of Protists   611



Cell Structure
The cells of protists are among the most elaborate of all cells. Multicellular plants, animals, and fungi are embedded
among the protists in eukaryotic phylogeny. In most plants and animals and some fungi, complexity arises out of
multicellularity, tissue specialization, and subsequent interaction because of these features. Although a
rudimentary form of multicellularity exists among some of the organisms labelled as “protists,” those that have
remained unicellular show how complexity can evolve in the absence of true multicellularity, with the differentiation
of cellular morphology and function. A few protists live as colonies that behave in some ways as a group of free-
living cells and in other ways as a multicellular organism. Some protists are composed of enormous, multinucleate,
single cells that look like amorphous blobs of slime, or in other cases, like ferns. In some species of protists, the
nuclei are different sizes and have distinct roles in protist cell function.

Single protist cells range in size from less than a micrometer to three meters in length to hectares! Protist cells may
be enveloped by animal-like cell membranes or plant-like cell walls. Others are encased in glassy silica-based shells
or wound with pellicles of interlocking protein strips. The pellicle functions like a flexible coat of armor, preventing
the protist from being torn or pierced without compromising its range of motion.

Metabolism
Protists exhibit many forms of nutrition and may be aerobic or anaerobic. Those that store energy by photosynthesis
belong to a group of photoautotrophs and are characterized by the presence of chloroplasts. Other protists are
heterotrophic and consume organic materials (such as other organisms) to obtain nutrition. Amoebas and some
other heterotrophic protist species ingest particles by a process called phagocytosis, in which the cell membrane
engulfs a food particle and brings it inward, pinching off an intracellular membranous sac, or vesicle, called a food
vacuole (Figure 23.7). In some protists, food vacuoles can be formed anywhere on the body surface, whereas in
others, they may be restricted to the base of a specialized feeding structure. The vesicle containing the ingested
particle, the phagosome, then fuses with a lysosome containing hydrolytic enzymes to produce a phagolysosome,
and the food particle is broken down into small molecules that can diffuse into the cytoplasm and be used in cellular
metabolism. Undigested remains ultimately are expelled from the cell via exocytosis.




FIGURE 23.7 Phagocytosis. The stages of phagocytosis include the engulfment of a food particle, the digestion of the particle using
hydrolytic enzymes contained within a lysosome, and the expulsion of undigested materials from the cell.

Subtypes of heterotrophs, called saprobes, absorb nutrients from dead organisms or their organic wastes. Some
protists can function as mixotrophs, obtaining nutrition by photoautotrophic or heterotrophic routes, depending on
whether sunlight or organic nutrients are available.

Motility
The majority of protists are motile, but different types of protists have evolved varied modes of movement (Figure
23.8). Some protists have one or more flagella, which they rotate or whip. Others are covered in rows or tufts of tiny
cilia that they beat in a coordinated manner to swim. Still others form cytoplasmic extensions called pseudopodia
anywhere on the cell, anchor the pseudopodia to a substrate, and pull themselves forward. Some protists can move
toward or away from a stimulus, a movement referred to as taxis. For example, movement toward light, termed
612   23 • Protists



      phototaxis, is accomplished by coupling their locomotion strategy with a light-sensing organ.




      FIGURE 23.8 Locomotor organelles in protists. Protists use various methods for transportation. (a) Paramecium waves hair-like
      appendages called cilia to propel itself. (b) Amoeba uses lobe-like pseudopodia to anchor itself to a solid surface and pull itself forward. (c)
      Euglena uses a whip-like tail called a flagellum to propel itself.

      Life Cycles
      Protists reproduce by a variety of mechanisms. Most undergo some form of asexual reproduction, such as binary
      fission, to produce two daughter cells. In protists, binary fission can be divided into transverse or longitudinal,
      depending on the axis of orientation; sometimes Paramecium exhibits this method. Some protists such as the true
      slime molds exhibit multiple fission and simultaneously divide into many daughter cells. Others produce tiny buds
      that go on to divide and grow to the size of the parental protist.

      Sexual reproduction, involving meiosis and fertilization, is common among protists, and many protist species can
      switch from asexual to sexual reproduction when necessary. Sexual reproduction is often associated with periods
      when nutrients are depleted or environmental changes occur. Sexual reproduction may allow the protist to
      recombine genes and produce new variations of progeny, some of which may be better suited to surviving changes
      in a new or changing environment. However, sexual reproduction is often associated with resistant cysts that are a
      protective, resting stage. Depending on habitat of the species, the cysts may be particularly resistant to temperature
      extremes, desiccation, or low pH. This strategy allows certain protists to “wait out” stressors until their environment
      becomes more favorable for survival or until they are carried (such as by wind, water, or transport on a larger
      organism) to a different environment, because cysts exhibit virtually no cellular metabolism.

      Protist life cycles range from simple to extremely elaborate. Certain parasitic protists have complicated life cycles
      and must infect different host species at different developmental stages to complete their life cycle. Some protists
      are unicellular in the haploid form and multicellular in the diploid form, a strategy employed by animals. Other
      protists have multicellular stages in both haploid and diploid forms, a strategy called alternation of generations,
      analogous to that used by plants.

      Habitats
      Nearly all protists exist in some type of aquatic environment, including freshwater and marine environments, damp
      soil, and even snow. Several protist species are parasites that infect animals or plants. A few protist species live on
      dead organisms or their wastes, and contribute to their decay.

      23.3 Groups of Protists
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe representative protist organisms from each of the six presently recognized supergroups of
            eukaryotes
         • Identify the evolutionary relationships of plants, animals, and fungi within the six presently recognized
            supergroups of eukaryotes
         • Identify defining features of protists in each of the six supergroups of eukaryotes.

      In the span of several decades, the Kingdom Protista has been disassembled because sequence analyses have



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 23.3 • Groups of Protists   613



revealed new genetic (and therefore evolutionary) relationships among these eukaryotes. Moreover, protists that
exhibit similar morphological features may have evolved analogous structures because of similar selective
pressures—rather than because of recent common ancestry. This phenomenon, called convergent evolution, is one
reason why protist classification is so challenging. The emerging classification scheme groups the entire domain
Eukarya into six “supergroups” that contain all of the protists as well as animals, plants, and fungi that evolved from
a common ancestor (Figure 23.9). Each of the supergroups is believed to be monophyletic, meaning that all
organisms within each supergroup are believed to have evolved from a single common ancestor, and thus all
members are most closely related to each other than to organisms outside that group. There is still evidence lacking
for the monophyly of some groups. Each supergroup can be viewed as representing one of many variants on
eukaryotic cell structure. In each group, one or more of the defining characters of the eukaryotic cell—the nucleus,
the cytoskeleton, and the endosymbiotic organelles—may have diverged from the "typical" pattern.
614   23 • Protists




      FIGURE 23.9 Eukaryotic supergroups. This diagram shows a proposed classification of the domain Eukarya. Currently, the domain Eukarya
      is divided into six supergroups. Within each supergroup are multiple kingdoms. Although each supergroup is believed to be monophyletic,
      the dotted lines suggest evolutionary relationships among the supergroups that continue to be debated.

      Keep in mind that the classification scheme presented here represents just one of several hypotheses, and the true
      evolutionary relationships are still to be determined. The six supergroups may be modified or replaced by a more
      appropriate hierarchy as genetic, morphological, and ecological data accumulate. When learning about protists, it is
      helpful to focus less on the nomenclature and more on the commonalities and differences that illustrate how each
      group has exploited the possibilities of eukaryotic life.

      Archaeplastida
      Molecular evidence supports the hypothesis that all Archaeplastida are descendents of an endosymbiotic
      relationship between a heterotrophic protist and a cyanobacterium. The protist members of the group include the



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       23.3 • Groups of Protists   615



red algae and green algae. It was from a common ancestor of these protists that the land plants evolved, since their
closest relatives are found in this group. The red and green algae include unicellular, multicellular, and colonial
forms. A variety of algal life cycles exists, but the most complex is alternation of generations, in which both haploid
and diploid stages are multicellular. A diploid sporophyte contains cells that undergo meiosis to produce haploid
spores. The spores germinate and grow into a haploid gametophyte, which then makes gametes by mitosis. The
gametes fuse to form a zygote that grows into a diploid sporophyte. Alternation of generations is seen in some
species of Archaeplastid algae, as well as some species of Stramenopiles (Figure 23.10). In some species, the
gametophyte and sporophyte look quite different, while in others they are nearly indistinguishable.

Glaucophytes
Glaucophytes are a small group of Archaeplastida interesting because their chloroplasts retain remnants of the
peptidoglycan cell wall of the ancestral cyanobacterial endosymbiont (Figure 23.10).




FIGURE 23.10 Glaucocystis. (credit: By ja:User:NEON / commons:User:NEON_ja - Own work, CC BY-SA 2.5,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=1706641 (https://openstax.org/l/Glaucocystis))

Red Algae
Red algae, or rhodophytes lack flagella, and are primarily multicellular, although they range in size from microscopic,
unicellular protists to large, multicellular forms grouped into the informal seaweed category. Red algae have a
second cell wall outside an inner cellulose cell wall. Carbohydrates in this wall are the source of agarose used for
electrophoresis gels and agar for solidifying bacterial media. The "red" in the red algae comes from phycoerythrins,
accessory photopigments that are red in color and obscure the green tint of chlorophyll in some species. Other
protists classified as red algae lack phycoerythrins and are parasites. Both the red algae and the glaucophytes store
carbohydrates in the cytoplasm rather than in the plastid. Red algae are common in tropical waters where they have
been detected at depths of 260 meters. Other red algae exist in terrestrial or freshwater environments. The red
algae life cycle is an unusual alternation of generations that includes two sporophyte phases, with meiosis occurring
only in the second sporophyte.

Green Algae: Chlorophytes and Charophytes
The most abundant group of algae is the green algae. The green algae exhibit features similar to those of the land
plants, particularly in terms of chloroplast structure. In both green algae and plants, carbohydrates are stored in the
plastid. That this group of protists shared a relatively recent common ancestor with land plants is well supported.
616   23 • Protists



      The green algae are subdivided into the chlorophytes and the charophytes. The charophytes are the closest living
      relatives to land plants and resemble them in morphology and reproductive strategies. The familiar Spirogyra is a
      charophyte. Charophytes are common in wet habitats, and their presence often signals a healthy ecosystem.

      The chlorophytes exhibit great diversity of form and function. Chlorophytes primarily inhabit freshwater and damp
      soil, and are a common component of plankton. Chlamydomonas is a simple, unicellular chlorophyte with a pear-
      shaped morphology and two opposing, anterior flagella that guide this protist toward light sensed by its eyespot.
      More complex chlorophyte species exhibit haploid gametes and spores that resemble Chlamydomonas.

      The chlorophyte Volvox is one of only a few examples of a colonial organism, which behaves in some ways like a
      collection of individual cells, but in other ways like the specialized cells of a multicellular organism (Figure 23.11).
      Volvox colonies contain 500 to 60,000 cells, each with two flagella, contained within a hollow, spherical matrix
      composed of a gelatinous glycoprotein secretion. Individual cells in a Volvox colony move in a coordinated fashion
      and are interconnected by cytoplasmic bridges. Only a few of the cells reproduce to create daughter colonies, an
      example of basic cell specialization in this organism. Daughter colonies are produced with their flagella on the inside
      and have to evert as they are released.




      FIGURE 23.11 Volvox. Volvox aureus is a green alga in the supergroup Archaeplastida. This species exists as a colony, consisting of cells
      immersed in a gel-like matrix and intertwined with each other via hair-like cytoplasmic extensions. (credit: Dr. Ralf Wagner)

      True multicellular organisms, such as the sea lettuce, Ulva, are also represented among the chlorophytes. In
      addition, some chlorophytes exist as large, multinucleate, single cells. Species in the genus Caulerpa exhibit
      flattened fern-like foliage and can reach lengths of 3 meters (Figure 23.12). Caulerpa species undergo nuclear
      division, but their cells do not complete cytokinesis, remaining instead as massive and elaborate single cells.




      FIGURE 23.12 A multinucleate alga. Caulerpa taxifolia is a chlorophyte consisting of a single cell containing potentially thousands of nuclei.
      (credit: NOAA). An interesting question is how a single cell can produce such complex shapes.


           LINK TO LEARNING
      Take a look at this video to see cytoplasmic streaming in a green alga.

      Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/23-3-groups-of-protists)




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        23.3 • Groups of Protists   617



Amoebozoa
Like the Archaeplastida, the Amoebozoa include species with single cells, species with large multinucleated cells,
and species that have multicellular phases. Amoebozoan cells characteristically exhibit pseudopodia that extend
like tubes or flat lobes. These pseudopods project outward from anywhere on the cell surface and can anchor to a
substrate. The protist then transports its cytoplasm into the pseudopod, thereby moving the entire cell. This type of
motion is similar to the cytoplasmic streaming used to move organelles in the Archaeplastida, and is also used by
other protists as a means of locomotion or as a method to distribute nutrients and oxygen. The Amoebozoa include
both free-living and parasitic species.

Gymnomoebae
The Gymnamoeba or lobose amoebae include both naked amoebae like the familiar Amoeba proteus and shelled
amoebae, whose bodies protrude like snails from their protective tests. Amoeba proteus is a large amoeba about
500 µm in diameter but is dwarfed by the multinucleate amoebae Pelomyxa, which can be 10 times its size.
Although Pelomyxa may have hundreds of nuclei, it has lost its mitochondria, but replaced them with bacterial
endosymbionts. The secondary loss or modification of mitochondria is a feature also seen in other protist groups.




FIGURE 23.13 Amoeba. Amoebae with tubular and lobe-shaped pseudopodia are seen under a microscope. These isolates would be
morphologically classified as amoebozoans.

Slime Molds
A subset of the amoebozoans, the slime molds, has several morphological similarities to fungi that are thought to be
the result of convergent evolution. For instance, during times of stress, some slime molds develop into spore-
generating fruiting bodies, much like fungi.

The slime molds are categorized on the basis of their life cycles into plasmodial or cellular types. Plasmodial slime
molds are composed of large, multinucleate cells and move along surfaces like an amorphous blob of slime during
their feeding stage (Figure 23.14). Food particles are lifted and engulfed into the slime mold as it glides along. The
"dog vomit" slime mold seen in Figure 23.14 is a particularly colorful specimen and its ability to creep about might
well trigger suspicion of alien invasion. Upon maturation, the plasmodium takes on a net-like appearance with the
ability to form fruiting bodies, or sporangia, during times of stress. Haploid spores are produced by meiosis within
the sporangia, and spores can be disseminated through the air or water to potentially land in more favorable
environments. If this occurs, the spores germinate to form ameboid or flagellate haploid cells that can combine with
each other and produce a diploid zygotic slime mold to complete the life cycle.
618   23 • Protists




      FIGURE 23.14 Plasmodial slime molds. The life cycle of the plasmodial slime mold is shown. The brightly colored plasmodium in the inset
      photo is a single-celled, multinucleate mass. (credit: modification of work by Dr. Jonatha Gott and the Center for RNA Molecular Biology,
      Case Western Reserve University)

      The cellular slime molds function as independent amoeboid cells when nutrients are abundant. When food is
      depleted, cellular slime molds aggregate into a mass of cells that behaves as a single unit, called a slug. Some cells
      in the slug contribute to a 2–3-millimeter stalk, drying up and dying in the process. Cells atop the stalk form an
      asexual fruiting body that contains haploid spores (Figure 23.15). As with plasmodial slime molds, the spores are
      disseminated and can germinate if they land in a moist environment. One representative genus of the cellular slime
      molds is Dictyostelium, which commonly exists in the damp soil of forests.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   23.3 • Groups of Protists     619




FIGURE 23.15 Cellular Slime Mold. The image shows several stages in the life cycle of Dictyostelium discoideum, including aggregated
cells, mobile slugs and their transformation into fruiting bodies with a cluster of spores supported by a stalk. (credit: By Usman Bashir (Own
work) [CC BY-SA 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0 (https://openstax.org/l/CCBY))], via Wikimedia Commons)


     LINK TO LEARNING
View this video to see the formation of a fruiting body by a cellular slime mold.

Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/23-3-groups-of-protists)


Opisthokonta
The Opisthokonts are named for the single posterior flagellum seen in flagellated cells of the group. The flagella of
other protists are anterior and their movement pulls the cells along, while the opisthokonts are pushed. Protist
members of the opisthokonts include the animal-like choanoflagellates, which are believed to resemble the
common ancestor of sponges and perhaps, all animals. Choanoflagellates include unicellular and colonial forms
(Figure 23.16), and number about 244 described species. In these organisms, the single, apical flagellum is
surrounded by a contractile collar composed of microvilli. The collar is used to filter and collect bacteria for
ingestion by the protist. A similar feeding mechanism is seen in the collar cells of sponges, which suggests a
possible connection between choanoflagellates and animals.

The Mesomycetozoa form a small group of parasites, primarily of fish, and at least one form that can parasitize
humans. Their life cycles are poorly understood. These organisms are of special interest, because they appear to be
so closely related to animals. In the past, they were grouped with fungi and other protists based on their
morphology.
620   23 • Protists




      FIGURE 23.16 A Colonial Choanoflagellate. (credit: By Dhzanette (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Choanoflagellate (https://openstax.org/l/
      choano)) [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons)

      The previous supergroups are all the products of primary endosymbiontic events and their organelles—nucleus,
      mitochondria, and chloroplasts—are what would be considered "typical," i.e., matching the diagrams you would find
      in an introductory biology book. The next three supergroups all contain at least some photosynthetic members
      whose chloroplasts were derived by secondary endosymbiosis. They also show some interesting variations in
      nuclear structure, and modification of mitochondria or chloroplasts.

      Rhizaria
      The Rhizaria supergroup includes many of the amoebas with thin threadlike, needle-like or root-like pseudopodia
      (Figure 23.17), rather than the broader lobed pseudopodia of the Amoebozoa. Many rhizarians make elaborate and
      beautiful tests—armor-like coverings for the body of the cell—composed of calcium carbonate, silicon, or strontium
      salts. Rhizarians have important roles in both carbon and nitrogen cycles. When rhizarians die, and their tests sink
      into deep water, the carbonates are out of reach of most decomposers, locking carbon dioxide away from the
      atmosphere. In general, this process by which carbon is transported deep into the ocean is described as the
      biological carbon pump, because carbon is “pumped” to the ocean depths where it is inaccessible to the
      atmosphere as carbon dioxide. The biological carbon pump is a crucial component of the carbon cycle that
      maintains lower atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. Foraminiferans are unusual in that they are the only eukaryotes
      known to participate in the nitrogen cycle by denitrification, an activity usually served only by prokaryotes.




      FIGURE 23.17 Rhizaria. Ammonia tepida, a Rhizaria species viewed here using phase contrast light microscopy, exhibits many threadlike
      pseudopodia. It also has a chambered calcium carbonate shell or test. (credit: modification of work by Scott Fay, UC Berkeley; scale-bar



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  23.3 • Groups of Protists   621



data from Matt Russell)

Foraminiferans
Foraminiferans, or forams, are unicellular heterotrophic protists, ranging from approximately 20 micrometers to
several centimeters in length, and occasionally resembling tiny snails (Figure 23.18). As a group, the forams exhibit
porous shells, called tests that are built from various organic materials and typically hardened with calcium
carbonate. The tests may house photosynthetic algae, which the forams can harvest for nutrition. Foram
pseudopodia extend through the pores and allow the forams to move, feed, and gather additional building materials.
Typically, forams are associated with sand or other particles in marine or freshwater habitats. Foraminiferans are
also useful as indicators of pollution and changes in global weather patterns.




       FIGURE 23.18 Foraminiferan Tests. These shells from foraminifera sank to the sea floor. (credit: Deep East 2001, NOAA/OER)

Radiolarians
A second subtype of Rhizaria, the radiolarians, exhibit intricate exteriors of glassy silica with radial or bilateral
symmetry (Figure 23.19). Needle-like pseudopods supported by microtubules radiate outward from the cell bodies
of these protists and function to catch food particles. The shells of dead radiolarians sink to the ocean floor, where
they may accumulate in 100 meter-thick depths. Preserved, sedimented radiolarians are very common in the fossil
record.




FIGURE 23.19 Radiolarian shell. This fossilized radiolarian shell was imaged using a scanning electron microscope. (credit: modification of
work by Hannes Grobe, Alfred Wegener Institute; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

Cercozoa
The Cercozoa are both morphologically and metabolically diverse, and include both naked and shelled forms. The
Chlorarachniophytes (Figure 23.20) are photosynthetic, having acquired chloroplasts by secondary endosymbiosis.
The chloroplast contains a remnant of the chlorophyte endosymbiont nucleus, sandwiched between the two sets of
622   23 • Protists



      chloroplast membranes. Vampyrellids or "vampire amoebae," as their name suggests, obtain their nutrients by
      thrusting a pseudopod into the interior of other cells and sucking out their contents.




      FIGURE 23.20 A Chlorarachniophyte. This rhizarian is mixotrophic, and can obtain nutrients both by photosynthesis and by trapping various
      microorganisms with its network of pseudopodia. (credit: By ja:User:NEON / commons:User:NEON_ja (Own work) [CC BY-SA 2.5
      (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5 (https://openstax.org/l/CCBY_25)) or CC BY-SA 2.5 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
      by-sa/2.5 (https://openstax.org/l/CCBY_25))], via Wikimedia Commons)

      Chromalveolata
      Current evidence suggests that species classified as chromalveolates are derived from a common ancestor that
      engulfed a photosynthetic red algal cell, which itself had already evolved chloroplasts from an endosymbiotic
      relationship with a photosynthetic prokaryote. Therefore, the ancestor of chromalveolates is believed to have
      resulted from a secondary endosymbiotic event. However, some chromalveolates appear to have lost red alga-
      derived plastid organelles or lack plastid genes altogether. Therefore, this supergroup should be considered a
      hypothesis-based working group that is subject to change. Chromalveolates include very important photosynthetic
      organisms, such as diatoms, brown algae, and significant disease agents in animals and plants. The chromalveolates
      can be subdivided into alveolates and stramenopiles.

      Alveolates: Dinoflagellates, Apicomplexians, and Ciliates
      A large body of data supports that the alveolates are derived from a shared common ancestor. The alveolates are
      named for the presence of an alveolus, or membrane-enclosed sac, beneath the cell membrane. The exact function
      of the alveolus is unknown, but it may be involved in osmoregulation. The alveolates are further categorized into
      some of the better-known protists: the dinoflagellates, the apicomplexans, and the ciliates.

      Dinoflagellates exhibit extensive morphological diversity and can be photosynthetic, heterotrophic, or mixotrophic.
      The chloroplast of photosynthetic dinoflagellates was derived by secondary endosymbiosis of a red alga. Many
      dinoflagellates are encased in interlocking plates of cellulose. Two perpendicular flagella fit into the grooves
      between the cellulose plates, with one flagellum extending longitudinally and a second encircling the dinoflagellate
      (Figure 23.21). Together, the flagella contribute to the characteristic spinning motion of dinoflagellates. These
      protists exist in freshwater and marine habitats, and are a component of plankton, the typically microscopic
      organisms that drift through the water and serve as a crucial food source for larger aquatic organisms.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                23.3 • Groups of Protists   623




FIGURE 23.21 Dinoflagellates. The dinoflagellates exhibit great diversity in shape. Many are encased in cellulose armor and have two
flagella that fit in grooves between the plates. Movement of these two perpendicular flagella causes a spinning motion.

Dinoflagellates have a nuclear variant called a dinokaryon. The chromosomes in the dinokaryon are highly
condensed throughout the cell cycle and do not have typical histones. Mitosis in dinoflagellates is closed, that is, the
spindle separates the chromosomes from outside of the nucleus without breakdown of the nuclear envelope.

Some dinoflagellates generate light, called bioluminescence, when they are jarred or stressed. Large numbers of
marine dinoflagellates (billions or trillions of cells per wave) can emit light and cause an entire breaking wave to
twinkle or take on a brilliant blue color (Figure 23.22). For approximately 20 species of marine dinoflagellates,
population explosions (also called blooms) during the summer months can tint the ocean with a muddy red color.
This phenomenon is called a red tide, and it results from the abundant red pigments present in dinoflagellate
plastids. In large quantities, these dinoflagellate species secrete an asphyxiating toxin that can kill fish, birds, and
marine mammals. Red tides can be massively detrimental to commercial fisheries, and humans who consume these
protists may become poisoned.




FIGURE 23.22 Dinoflagellate bioluminescence. Bioluminescence is emitted from dinoflagellates in a breaking wave, as seen from the New
Jersey coast. (credit: “catalano82”/Flickr)

The apicomplexan protists are named for a structure called an apical complex (Figure 23.23), which appears to be a
highly modified secondary chloroplast. The apicoplast genome is similar to those of dinoflagellate chloroplasts. The
apical complex is specialized for entry and infection of host cells. Indeed, all apicomplexans are parasitic. This
group includes the genus Plasmodium, which causes malaria in humans. Apicomplexan life cycles are complex,
involving multiple hosts and stages of sexual and asexual reproduction.
624   23 • Protists




      FIGURE 23.23 Apicomplexa. (a) Apicomplexans are parasitic protists. They have a characteristic apical complex that enables them to infect
      host cells. (b) Plasmodium, the causative agent of malaria, has a complex life cycle typical of apicomplexans. (credit b: modification of work
      by CDC)

      The ciliates, which include Paramecium and Tetrahymena, are a group of protists 10 to 3,000 micrometers in length
      that are covered in rows, tufts, or spirals of tiny cilia. By beating their cilia synchronously or in waves, ciliates can
      coordinate directed movements and ingest food particles. Certain ciliates have fused cilia-based structures that
      function like paddles, funnels, or fins. Ciliates also are surrounded by a pellicle, providing protection without
      compromising agility. The genus Paramecium includes protists that have organized their cilia into a plate-like
      primitive mouth, called an oral groove, which is used to capture and digest bacteria (Figure 23.24). Food captured in
      the oral groove enters a food vacuole, where it combines with digestive enzymes. Waste particles are expelled by an
      exocytic vesicle that fuses at a specific region on the cell membrane, called the anal pore. In addition to a vacuole-
      based digestive system, Paramecium also uses contractile vacuoles, which are osmoregulatory vesicles that fill
      with water as it enters the cell by osmosis and then contract to squeeze water from the cell. Ciliates therefore
      exhibit considerable structural complexity without having achieved multicellularity.




      FIGURE 23.24 Paramecium. Paramecium has a primitive mouth (called an oral groove) to ingest food, and an anal pore to eliminate waste.
      Contractile vacuoles allow the organism to excrete excess water. Cilia enable the organism to move. (credit “paramecium micrograph”:
      modification of work by NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)


           LINK TO LEARNING
      Watch the video of the contractile vacuole of Paramecium expelling water to keep the cell osmotically balanced.

      Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/23-3-groups-of-protists)


      Paramecium has two nuclei, a macronucleus and a micronucleus, in each cell. The micronucleus is essential for
      sexual reproduction, and is in many ways a typical eukaryotic nucleus, except that its genes are not transcribed. The
      transcribed nucleus is the macronucleus, which directs asexual binary fission and all other biological functions. The
      macronucleus is a multiploid nucleus constructed from the micronucleus during sexual reproduction. Periodic



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           23.3 • Groups of Protists   625



reconstruction of the macronucleus is necessary because the macronucleus divides amitotically, and thus becomes
genetically unbalanced over a period of successive cell replications. Paramecium and most other ciliates reproduce
sexually by conjugation. This process begins when two different mating types of Paramecium make physical contact
and join with a cytoplasmic bridge (Figure 23.25). The diploid micronucleus in each cell then undergoes meiosis to
produce four haploid micronuclei. Three of these degenerate in each cell, leaving one micronucleus that then
undergoes mitosis, generating two haploid micronuclei. The cells each exchange one of these haploid nuclei and
move away from each other. Fusion of the haploid micronuclei generates a completely novel diploid pre-
micronucleus in each conjugative cell. This pre-micronucleus undergoes three rounds of mitosis to produce eight
copies, and the original macronucleus disintegrates. Four of the eight pre-micronuclei become full-fledged
micronuclei, whereas the other four perform multiple rounds of DNA replication. The copies of the micronuclear
chromosomes are severely edited to form hundreds of smaller chromosomes that contain only the protein coding
genes. Each of these smaller chromosomes gets new telomeres as the macronucleus differentiates. Two cycles of
cell division then yield four new Paramecia from each original conjugative cell.



        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 23.25 Conjugation in Paramecium. The complex process of sexual reproduction in Paramecium creates eight daughter cells from
two original cells. Each cell has a macronucleus and a micronucleus. During sexual reproduction, the macronucleus dissolves and is
replaced by a micronucleus. (credit “micrograph”: modification of work by Ian Sutton; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
626   23 • Protists



      Which of the following statements about Paramecium sexual reproduction is false?

        a.   The macronuclei are derived from micronuclei.
        b.   Both mitosis and meiosis occur during sexual reproduction.
        c.   The conjugate pair swaps macronucleii.
        d.   Each parent produces four daughter cells.


      Stramenopiles: Diatoms, Brown Algae, Golden Algae and Oomycetes
      The other subgroup of chromalveolates, the stramenopiles, includes photosynthetic marine algae and heterotrophic
      protists. The chloroplast of these algae is derived from red alga. The identifying feature of this group is the presence
      of a textured, or “hairy,” flagellum. Many stramenopiles also have an additional flagellum that lacks hair-like
      projections (Figure 23.26). Members of this subgroup range in size from single-celled diatoms to the massive and
      multicellular kelp.




              FIGURE 23.26 Stramenopile flagella. This stramenopile cell has a single hairy flagellum and a secondary smooth flagellum.

      The diatoms are unicellular photosynthetic protists that encase themselves in intricately patterned, glassy cell walls
      composed of silicon dioxide in a matrix of organic particles (Figure 23.27). These protists are a component of
      freshwater and marine plankton. Most species of diatoms reproduce asexually, although some instances of sexual
      reproduction and sporulation also exist. Some diatoms exhibit a slit in their silica shell, called a raphe. By expelling
      a stream of mucopolysaccharides from the raphe, the diatom can attach to surfaces or propel itself in one direction.




      FIGURE 23.27 Diatoms. Assorted diatoms, visualized here using light microscopy, live among annual sea ice in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica.
      Diatoms range in size from 2 to 200 µm. (credit: Prof. Gordon T. Taylor, Stony Brook University, NSF, NOAA)




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              23.3 • Groups of Protists   627



During periods of nutrient availability, diatom populations bloom to numbers greater than can be consumed by
aquatic organisms. The excess diatoms die and sink to the sea floor where they are not easily reached by saprobes
that feed on dead organisms. As a result, the carbon dioxide that the diatoms had consumed and incorporated into
their cells during photosynthesis is not returned to the atmosphere. Along with rhizarians and other shelled protists,
diatoms help to maintain a balanced carbon cycle.

Like diatoms, golden algae are largely unicellular, although some species can form large colonies. Their
characteristic gold color results from their extensive use of carotenoids, a group of photosynthetic pigments that are
generally yellow or orange in color. Golden algae are found in both freshwater and marine environments, where they
form a major part of the plankton community.

The brown algae are primarily marine, multicellular organisms that are known colloquially as seaweeds. Giant kelps
are a type of brown alga. Some brown algae have evolved specialized tissues that resemble terrestrial plants, with
root-like holdfasts, stem-like stipes, and leaf-like blades that are capable of photosynthesis. The stipes of giant
kelps are enormous, extending in some cases for 60 meters. Like the green algae, brown algae have a variety of life
cycles, including alternation of generations. In the brown algae genus Laminaria, haploid spores develop into
multicellular gametophytes, which produce haploid gametes that combine to produce diploid organisms that then
become multicellular organisms with a different structure from the haploid form (Figure 23.28).



        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 23.28 Alternation of generations in a brown alga. Several species of brown algae, such as the Laminaria shown here, have evolved
life cycles in which both the haploid (gametophyte) and diploid (sporophyte) forms are multicellular. The gametophyte is different in
structure than the sporophyte. (credit “laminaria photograph”: modification of work by Claire Fackler, CINMS, NOAA Photo Library)

Which of the following statements about the Laminaria life cycle is false?

  a.   1n zoospores form in the sporangia.
  b.   The sporophyte is the 2n plant.
  c.   The gametophyte is diploid.
  d.   Both the gametophyte and sporophyte stages are multicellular.


The water molds, oomycetes (“egg fungus”), were so-named based on their fungus-like morphology, but molecular
data have shown that the water molds are not closely related to fungi. The oomycetes are characterized by a
cellulose-based cell wall and an extensive network of filaments that allow for nutrient uptake. As diploid spores,
many oomycetes have two oppositely directed flagella (one hairy and one smooth) for locomotion. The oomycetes
628   23 • Protists



      are nonphotosynthetic and include many saprobes and parasites. The saprobes appear as white fluffy growths on
      dead organisms (Figure 23.29). Most oomycetes are aquatic, but some parasitize terrestrial plants. One plant
      pathogen is Phytophthora infestans, the causative agent of late blight of potatoes, such as occurred in the
      nineteenth century Irish potato famine.




               FIGURE 23.29 Oomycetes. A saprobic oomycete engulfs a dead insect. (credit: modification of work by Thomas Bresson)

      Excavata
      Many of the protist species classified into the supergroup Excavata are asymmetrical, single-celled organisms with a
      feeding groove “excavated” from one side. This supergroup includes heterotrophic predators, photosynthetic
      species, and parasites. Its subgroups are the diplomonads, parabasalids, and euglenozoans. The group includes a
      variety of modified mitochondria, as well as chloroplasts derived from green algae by secondary endosymbiosis.
      Many of the euglenozoans are free-living, but most diplomonads and parabasalids are symbionts or parasites.

      Diplomonads
      Among the Excavata are the diplomonads, which include the intestinal parasite, Giardia lamblia (Figure 23.30). Until
      recently, these protists were believed to lack mitochondria. Mitochondrial remnant organelles, called mitosomes,
      have since been identified in diplomonads, but although these mitosomes are essentially nonfunctional as
      respiratory organelles, they do function in iron and sulfur metabolism. Diplomonads exist in anaerobic environments
      and use alternative pathways, such as glycolysis, to generate energy. Each diplomonad cell has two similar, but not
      identical haploid nuclei. Diplomonads have four pairs of locomotor flagella that are fairly deeply rooted in basal
      bodies that lie between the two nuclei.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                 23.3 • Groups of Protists   629




FIGURE 23.30 Giardia. The mammalian intestinal parasite Giardia lamblia, visualized here using scanning electron microscopy, is a
waterborne protist that causes severe diarrhea when ingested. (credit: modification of work by Janice Carr, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt
Russell)

Parabasalids
A second Excavata subgroup, the parabasalids, are named for the parabasal apparatus, which consists of a Golgi
complex associated with cytoskeletal fibers. Other cytoskeletal features include an axostyle, a bundle of fibers that
runs the length of the cell and may even extend beyond it. Parabasalids move with flagella and membrane rippling,
and these and other cytoskeletal modifications may assist locomotion. Like the diplomonads, the parabasalids
exhibit modified mitochondria. In parabasalids these structures function anaerobically and are called
hydrogenosomes because they produce hydrogen gas as a byproduct.

The parabasalid Trichomonas vaginalis causes trichomoniasis, a sexually transmitted disease in humans, which
appears in an estimated 180 million cases worldwide each year. Whereas males rarely exhibit symptoms during an
infection with this protist, infected females may become more susceptible to secondary infection with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and may be more likely to develop cervical cancer. Pregnant people infected with T.
vaginalis are at an increased risk of serious complications, such as pre-term delivery.

Some of the most complex of the parabasalids are those that colonize the rumen of ruminant animals and the guts
of termites. These organisms can digest cellulose, a metabolic talent that is unusual among eukaryotic cells. They
have multiple flagella arranged in complex patterns and some additionally recruit spirochetes that attach to their
surface to act as accessory locomotor structures.

     LINK TO LEARNING
Termite gut endosymbionts

Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/23-3-groups-of-protists)


Euglenozoans
Euglenozoans includes parasites, heterotrophs, autotrophs, and mixotrophs, ranging in size from 10 to 500 µm.
Euglenoids move through their aquatic habitats using two long flagella that guide them toward light sources sensed
by a primitive ocular organ called an eyespot. The familiar genus, Euglena, encompasses some mixotrophic species
that display a photosynthetic capability only when light is present. The chloroplast of Euglena descends from a
green alga by secondary endosymbiosis. In the dark, the chloroplasts of Euglena shrink up and temporarily cease
functioning, and the cells instead take up organic nutrients from their environment. Euglena has a tough pellicle
composed of bands of protein attached to the cytoskeleton. The bands spiral around the cell and give Euglena its
exceptional flexibility.

The human parasite, Trypanosoma brucei, belongs to a different subgroup of Euglenozoa, the kinetoplastids. The
630   23 • Protists



      kinetoplastid subgroup is named after the kinetoplast, a large modified mitochondrion carrying multiple circular
      DNAs. This subgroup includes several parasites, collectively called trypanosomes, which cause devastating human
      diseases and infect an insect species during a portion of their life cycle. T. brucei develops in the gut of the tsetse fly
      after the fly bites an infected human or other mammalian host. The parasite then travels to the insect salivary
      glands to be transmitted to another human or other mammal when the infected tsetse fly consumes another blood
      meal. T. brucei is common in central Africa and is the causative agent of African sleeping sickness, a disease
      associated with severe chronic fatigue, coma, and can be fatal if left untreated since it leads to progressive decline
      of the function of the central nervous system.




      FIGURE 23.31 Sleeping sickness. Trypanosoma brucei, the causative agent of sleeping sickness, spends part of its life cycle in the tsetse fly
      and part in humans. (credit: modification of work by CDC)


           LINK TO LEARNING
      Watch this video to see T. brucei swimming.

      Access multimedia content (https://openstax.org/books/biology-2e/pages/23-3-groups-of-protists)


      23.4 Ecology of Protists
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Describe the role that protists play in the ecosystem
         • Describe important pathogenic species of protists

      Protists function in various ecological niches. Whereas some protist species are essential components of the food
      chain and generators of biomass, others function in the decomposition of organic materials. Still other protists are
      dangerous human pathogens or causative agents of devastating plant diseases.

      Primary Producers/Food Sources
      Protists are essential sources of food and provide nutrition for many other organisms. In some cases, as with
      zooplankton, protists are consumed directly. Alternatively, photosynthetic protists serve as producers of nutrition for
      other organisms. Paramecium bursaria and several other species of ciliates are mixotrophic due to a symbiotic



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                23.4 • Ecology of Protists   631



relationship with green algae. This is a temporary version of the secondarily endosymbiotic chloroplast found in
Euglena. But these symbiotic associations are not restricted to protists. For instance, photosynthetic dinoflagellates
called zooxanthellae provide nutrients for the coral polyps (Figure 23.32) that house them, giving corals a boost of
energy to secrete their calcium carbonate skeleton. In turn, the corals provide the protist with a protected
environment and the compounds needed for photosynthesis. This type of symbiotic relationship is important in
nutrient-poor environments. Without dinoflagellate symbionts, corals lose algal pigments in a process called coral
bleaching, and they eventually die. This explains why reef-building corals typically do not reside in waters deeper
than 20 meters: insufficient light reaches those depths for dinoflagellates to photosynthesize.




  FIGURE 23.32 Coral with symbiotic dinoflagellates. Coral polyps obtain nutrition through a symbiotic relationship with dinoflagellates.

The protists and their products of photosynthesis are essential—directly or indirectly—to the survival of organisms
ranging from bacteria to mammals (Figure 23.33). As primary producers, protists feed a large proportion of the
world’s aquatic species. (On land, terrestrial plants serve as primary producers.) In fact, approximately 25 percent
of the world’s photosynthesis is conducted by photosynthetic protists, particularly dinoflagellates, diatoms, and
multicellular algae.
632   23 • Protists




      FIGURE 23.33 Protists contribute to the food chain. Virtually all aquatic organisms depend directly or indirectly on protists for food. (credit
      “mollusks”: modification of work by Craig Stihler, USFWS; credit “crab”: modification of work by David Berkowitz; credit “dolphin”:
      modification of work by Mike Baird; credit “fish”: modification of work by Tim Sheerman-Chase; credit “penguin”: modification of work by
      Aaron Logan)

      Protists do not create food sources only for sea-dwelling organisms. Recall that certain anaerobic parabasalid
      species exist in the digestive tracts of termites and wood-eating cockroaches, where they contribute an essential
      step in the digestion of cellulose ingested by these insects as they consume wood.

      Human Pathogens
      As we have seen, a pathogen is anything that causes disease. Parasitic organisms live in or on a host organism and
      harm the organism. A small number of protists are serious pathogenic parasites that must infect other organisms to
      survive and propagate. For example, protist parasites include the causative agents of malaria, African sleeping
      sickness, amoebic encephalitis, and waterborne gastroenteritis in humans. Other protist pathogens prey on plants,
      effecting massive destruction of food crops.

      Plasmodium Species
      In 2015 WHO reported over 200 million cases of malaria, mostly in Africa, South America, and southern Asia.
      However, it is not well known that malaria was also a prevalent and debilitating disease of the North Central region
      of the United States, particularly Michigan, with its thousands of lakes and numerous swamps. Prior to the civil war,
      and the drainage of many swamps, virtually everyone who immigrated to Michigan picked up malaria (ague as it was
      called in the late 1800s), and the pale, sallow, bloated faces of that period were the rule. The only healthy faces
      were worn by those immigrants who had just arrived. In fact, there were more deaths due to malaria in Michigan
      than those from the Civil War.

      We now know that malaria is caused by several species of the apicomplexan protist genus Plasmodium. Members of
      Plasmodium must sequentially require both a mosquito and a vertebrate to complete their life cycle. In vertebrates,
      the parasite develops in liver cells (the exoerythrocytic stage) and goes on to infect red blood cells (the erythrocytic
      stage), bursting from and destroying the blood cells with each asexual replication cycle (Figure 23.34). Of the four
      Plasmodium species known to infect humans, P. falciparum accounts for 50 percent of all malaria cases and is the
      primary (and deadliest) cause of disease-related fatalities in tropical regions of the world. In 2015, it was estimated
      that malaria caused over 400,000 deaths, mostly in African children. During the course of malaria, P. falciparum can
      infect and destroy more than one-half of a human’s circulating blood cells, leading to severe anemia. In response to



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  23.4 • Ecology of Protists   633



waste products released as the parasites burst from infected blood cells, the host immune system mounts a
massive inflammatory response with episodes of delirium-inducing fever (paroxysms) as parasites lyse red blood
cells, spilling parasite waste into the bloodstream. P. falciparum is transmitted to humans by the African mosquito,
Anopheles gambiae. Techniques to kill, sterilize, or avoid exposure to this highly aggressive mosquito species are
crucial to malaria control. Ironically, a type of genetic control has arisen in parts of the world where malaria is
endemic. Possession of one copy of the HbS beta globin allele results in malaria resistance. Unfortunately, this allele
also has an unfortunate second effect; when homozygous it causes sickle cell disease.




FIGURE 23.34 Malaria parasite. Red blood cells are shown to be infected with P. falciparum, the causative agent of malaria. In this light
microscopic image taken using a 100× oil immersion lens, the ring-shaped P. falciparum stains purple. (credit: modification of work by
Michael Zahniser; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)


     LINK TO LEARNING
This movie (https://openstax.org/l/malaria) depicts the pathogenesis of Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent
of malaria.


Trypanosomes
Trypanosoma brucei (Figure 23.35), transmitted by tsetse flies (Glossina spp.) in Africa, and related flies in South
America, is a flagellated endoparasite responsible for the deadly disease nagana in cattle and horses, and for
African sleeping sickness in humans. This trypanosome confounds the human immune system by changing its thick
layer of surface glycoproteins with each infectious cycle. (The glycoproteins are identified by the immune system as
foreign antigens, and a specific antibody defense is mounted against the parasite.) However, T. brucei has
thousands of possible antigens, and with each subsequent generation, the protist switches to a glycoprotein coating
with a different molecular structure. In this way, T. brucei is capable of replicating continuously without the immune
system ever succeeding in clearing the parasite. Without treatment, T. brucei attacks red blood cells, causing the
patient to lapse into a coma and eventually die. During epidemic periods, mortality from the disease can be high.
Greater surveillance and control measures lead to a reduction in reported cases; some of the lowest numbers
reported in 50 years (fewer than 10,000 cases in all of sub-Saharan Africa) have happened since 2009.

     LINK TO LEARNING
This movie (https://openstax.org/l/African_sleep) discusses the pathogenesis of Trypanosoma brucei, the causative
agent of African sleeping sickness.


In Latin America, another species of trypanosome, T. cruzi, is responsible for Chagas disease. T. cruzi infections are
mainly caused by a blood-sucking “kissing bug” in the genus Triatoma. These “true bugs” bite the host during the
night and then defecate on the wound, transmitting the trypanosome to the victim. The victim scratches the wound,
further inoculating the site with trypanosomes at the location of the bite. After about 10 weeks, individuals enter the
634   23 • Protists



      chronic phase but most never develop further symptoms. In about 30 percent of cases, however, the trypanosome
      causes further damage, especially to the heart and digestive system tissues in the chronic phase of infection,
      leading to malnutrition and heart failure due to abnormal heart rhythms. An estimated 10 million people are
      infected with Chagas disease, and it is estimated to cause 10,000-12,000 deaths per year.




      FIGURE 23.35 Trypanosomes. Trypanosomes are shown among red blood cells. (credit: modification of work by Dr. Myron G. Shultz; scale-
      bar data from Matt Russell)

      Plant Parasites
      Protist parasites of terrestrial plants include agents that destroy food crops. The oomycete Plasmopara viticola
      parasitizes grape plants, causing a disease called downy mildew (Figure 23.36). Grape plants infected with P.
      viticola appear stunted and have discolored, withered leaves. The spread of downy mildew nearly collapsed the
      French wine industry in the nineteenth century.




      FIGURE 23.36 Protist plant infections. Both downy and powdery mildews on this grape leaf are caused by an infection of P. viticola. (credit:
      modification of work by USDA)

      Phytophthora infestans is an oomycete responsible for potato late blight, which causes potato stalks and stems to
      decay into black slime (Figure 23.37). Widespread potato blight caused by P. infestans precipitated the well-known
      Irish potato famine in the nineteenth century that claimed the lives of approximately 1 million people and led to the
      emigration of at least 1 million more from Ireland. Late blight continues to plague potato crops in certain parts of the
      United States and Russia, wiping out as much as 70 percent of crops when no pesticides are applied.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                23.4 • Ecology of Protists   635




FIGURE 23.37 Potato blight. These unappetizing remnants result from an infection with P. infestans, the causative agent of potato late
blight. (credit: USDA)

Protist Decomposers
The fungus-like protist saprobes are specialized to absorb nutrients from nonliving organic matter, such as dead
organisms or their wastes. For instance, many types of oomycetes grow on dead animals or algae. Saprobic protists
have the essential function of returning inorganic nutrients to the soil and water. This process allows for new plant
growth, which in turn generates sustenance for other organisms along the food chain. Indeed, without saprobe
species, such as protists, fungi, and bacteria, life would cease to exist as all organic carbon became “tied up” in
dead organisms.
636   23 • Key Terms




Key Terms
biological carbon pump process by which inorganic                kinetoplastids (phylum: Euglenozoa)
   carbon is fixed by photosynthetic species that then        mitosome nonfunctional organelle carried in the cells
   die and fall to the sea floor where they cannot be            of diplomonads (Excavata) that likely evolved from a
   reached by saprobes and their carbon dioxide                  mitochondrion
   consumption cannot be returned to the atmosphere           mixotroph organism that can obtain nutrition by
bioluminescence generation and emission of light by              autotrophic or heterotrophic means, usually
   an organism, as in dinoflagellates                            facultatively
contractile vacuole vesicle that fills with water (as it      pellicle outer cell covering composed of interlocking
   enters the cell by osmosis) and then contracts to             protein strips that function like a flexible coat of
   squeeze water from the cell; an osmoregulatory                armor, preventing cells from being torn or pierced
   vesicle                                                       without compromising their range of motion
cytoplasmic streaming movement of cytoplasm into              phagolysosome cellular body formed by the union of
   an extended pseudopod such that the entire cell is            a phagosome containing the ingested particle with a
   transported to the site of the pseudopod                      lysosome that contains hydrolytic enzymes
endosymbiosis engulfment of one cell within another           plankton diverse group of mostly microscopic
   such that the engulfed cell survives, and both cells          organisms that drift in marine and freshwater
   benefit; the process responsible for the evolution of         systems and serve as a food source for larger
   mitochondria and chloroplasts in eukaryotes                   aquatic organisms
endosymbiotic theory theory that states that                  plastid one of a group of related organelles in plant
   eukaryotes may have been a product of one cell                cells that are involved in the storage of starches,
   engulfing another, one living within another, and             fats, proteins, and pigments
   evolving over time until the separate cells were no        raphe slit in the silica shell of diatoms through which
   longer recognizable as such                                   the protist secretes a stream of
hydrogenosome organelle carried by parabasalids                  mucopolysaccharides for locomotion and
   (Excavata) that functions anaerobically and outputs           attachment to substrates
   hydrogen gas as a byproduct; likely evolved from           test porous shell of a foram that is built from various
   mitochondria                                                  organic materials and typically hardened with
kinetoplast mass of DNA carried within the single,               calcium carbonate
   oversized mitochondrion, characteristic of

Chapter Summary
23.1 Eukaryotic Origins                                       at least part of its life cycle, but more data are needed
                                                              to confirm this hypothesis. Today’s eukaryotes are very
The oldest fossil evidence of eukaryotes is about 2
                                                              diverse in their shapes, organization, life cycles, and
billion years old. Fossils older than this all appear to be
                                                              number of cells per individual.
prokaryotes. It is probable that today’s eukaryotes are
descended from an ancestor that had a prokaryotic             23.2 Characteristics of Protists
organization. The last common ancestor of today’s
                                                              Protists are extremely diverse in terms of their
Eukarya had several characteristics, including cells
                                                              biological and ecological characteristics, partly
with nuclei and an endomembrane system (which
                                                              because they are an artificial assemblage of
includes the nuclear envelope). Its chromosomes were
                                                              phylogenetically unrelated groups. Protists display
linear and contained DNA associated with histones.
                                                              highly varied cell structures, several types of
The nuclear genome seems to be descended from an
                                                              reproductive strategies, virtually every possible type of
archaean ancestor. This ancestor would have had a
                                                              nutrition, and varied habitats. Most single-celled
cytoskeleton and divided its chromosomes mitotically.
                                                              protists are motile, but these organisms use diverse
The ancestral cytoskeletal system included the ability        structures for transportation.
to make cilia/flagella during at least part of its life
cycle. It was aerobic because it had mitochondria
                                                              23.3 Groups of Protists
derived from an aerobic alpha-proteobacterium that            The process of classifying protists into meaningful
lived inside a host cell. Whether this host had a nucleus     groups is ongoing, but genetic data in the past 20 years
at the time of the initial symbiosis remains unknown.         have clarified many relationships that were previously
The last common ancestor may have had a cell wall for


Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               23 • Visual Connection Questions   637



unclear or mistaken. The majority view at present is to   commonalities at the morphological, physiological, and
order all eukaryotes into six supergroups:                ecological levels can be identified.
Archaeplastida, Amoebozoa, Opisthokonta, Rhizaria,
Chromalveolata, and Excavata. The goal of this
                                                          23.4 Ecology of Protists
classification scheme is to create clusters of species    Protists function at several levels of the ecological food
that all are derived from a common ancestor. At           web: as primary producers, as direct food sources, and
present, the monophyly of some of the supergroups are     as decomposers. In addition, many protists are
better supported by genetic data than others. Although    parasites of plants and animals and can cause deadly
tremendous variation exists within the supergroups,       human diseases or destroy valuable crops.

Visual Connection Questions
   1. Figure 23.5 What evidence is there that                      d. Each parent produces four daughter cells.
      mitochondria were incorporated into the
      ancestral eukaryotic cell before chloroplasts?         3. Figure 23.28 Which of the following statements
                                                                about the Laminaria life cycle is false?
   2. Figure 23.25 Which of the following statements
                                                                  a. 1n zoospores form in the sporangia.
      about Paramecium sexual reproduction is false?
                                                                  b. The sporophyte is the 2n plant.
        a. The macronuclei are derived from
                                                                  c. The gametophyte is diploid.
            micronuclei.
                                                                  d. Both the gametophyte and sporophyte
        b. Both mitosis and meiosis occur during
                                                                      stages are multicellular.
            sexual reproduction.
        c. The conjugate pair swaps macronuclei.


Review Questions
   4. What event is thought to have contributed to the          Monocercomonoides, and demonstrated that
      evolution of eukaryotes?                                  this organism has no detectable mitochondrial
        a. global warming                                       genes. However, its genome was arranged in
        b. glaciation                                           linear chromosomes wrapped around histones
        c. volcanic activity                                    which are contained within the nucleus.
        d. oxygenation of the atmosphere                        Monocercomonoides is therefore a(n)
                                                                _________.
   5. Which characteristic is shared by prokaryotes                a. Bacteria
      and eukaryotes?                                              b. Archea
        a. cytoskeleton                                            c. Eukaryote
        b. nuclear envelope                                        d. Endosymbiont
        c. DNA-based genome
        d. mitochondria                                      9. Which of the following observations about a
                                                                bacterium would distinguish it from the last
   6. Mitochondria most likely evolved by                       eukaryotic common ancestor?
      _____________.                                              a. A double-stranded DNA genome
        a. a photosynthetic cyanobacterium                        b. Lack of a membrane-bound structure
        b. cytoskeletal elements                                     surrounding the genome
        c. endosymbiosis                                          c. Fatty acids in the lipid bilayer of the
        d. membrane proliferation                                    plasma membrane
                                                                  d. Enclosed by a cell wall
   7. Which of these protists is believed to have
      evolved following a secondary endosymbiosis?         10. Protists that have a pellicle are surrounded by
        a. green algae                                         ______________.
        b. cyanobacteria                                         a. silica dioxide
        c. red algae                                             b. calcium carbonate
        d. chlorarachniophytes                                   c. carbohydrates
                                                                 d. proteins
   8. In 2016, scientists published the genome of
638   23 • Critical Thinking Questions



  11. Protists with the capabilities to perform            17. What is the function of the raphe in diatoms?
      photosynthesis and to absorb nutrients from               a. locomotion
      dead organisms are called ______________.                 b. defense
        a. photoautotrophs                                      c. capturing food
        b. mixotrophs                                           d. photosynthesis
        c. saprobes
        d. heterotrophs                                    18. What genus of protists appears to contradict the
                                                               statement that unicellularity restricts cell size?
  12. Which of these locomotor organs would likely be            a. Dictyostelium
      the shortest?                                              b. Ulva
        a. a flagellum                                           c. Plasmodium
        b. a cilium                                              d. Caulerpa
        c. an extended pseudopod
        d. a pellicle                                      19. A marine biologist analyzing water samples
                                                               notices a protist with a calcium carbonate shell
  13. Alternation of generations describes which of            that moves by pseudopodia extension. The
      the following?                                           protist is likely to be closely related to which
        a. The haploid form can be multicellular; the          species?
            diploid form is unicellular.                         a. Fuligo septica (Dog Vomit slime mold)
        b. The haploid form is unicellular; the diploid          b. Circogonia icosahedra (Radiolarian)
            form can be multicellular.                           c. Euglena viridis
        c. Both the haploid and diploid forms can be             d. Ammonia tepida
            multicellular.
        d. Neither the haploid nor the diploid forms       20. An example of carbon fixation is
            can be multicellular.                              _____________.
                                                                 a. photosynthesis
  14. The amoeba E. histolytica is a pathogen that               b. decomposition
      forms liver abscesses in infected individuals. Its         c. phagocytosis
      metabolic classification is most likely ______.            d. parasitism
        a. Anaerobic heterotroph
        b. Mixotroph                                       21. Which parasitic protist evades the host immune
        c. Aerobic phototroph                                  system by altering its surface proteins with each
        d. Phagocytic autotroph                                generation?
                                                                 a. Paramecium caudatum
  15. Which protist group exhibits mitochondrial                 b. Trypanosoma brucei
      remnants with reduced functionality?                       c. Plasmodium falciparum
        a. slime molds                                           d. Phytophthora infestans
        b. diatoms
        c. parabasalids                                    22. Which of the following is not a way that protists
        d. dinoflagellates                                     contribute to the food web?
                                                                 a. They fix carbon into organic molecules.
  16. Conjugation between two Paramecia produces                 b. They occupy the apex producer niche.
      ________ total daughter cells.                             c. They enter symbiotic relationships with
        a. 2                                                         animals.
        b. 4                                                     d. They recycle nutrients back into the
        c. 8                                                         carbon and nitrogen cycles.
        d. 16


Critical Thinking Questions
  23. Describe the hypothesized steps in the origin of         Archaea, while other aspects of eukaryotic cell
      eukaryotic cells.                                        composition appear more closely related to
                                                               Bacteria. Explain how endosymbiosis could
  24. Some aspects of eukaryotes are more similar to
                                                               resolve this paradox.



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            23 • Critical Thinking Questions   639



25. Explain in your own words why sexual                     for an obligate saprobe? Suggest an alternative
    reproduction can be useful if a protist’s                organ for a saprobic protist.
    environment changes.
                                                         30. Opisthokonta includes animals and fungi, as well
26. Giardia lamblia is a cyst-forming protist parasite       as protists. Describe the key feature of this
    that causes diarrhea if ingested. Given this             phylum, and an example of how an organism in
    information, against what type(s) of                     each kingdom uses this feature.
    environments might G. lamblia cysts be
                                                         31. Describe two ways in which paramecium differs
    particularly resistant?
                                                             from the projected traits of the last eukaryotic
27. Explain how the definition of protists ensures           common ancestor.
    that the kingdom Protista includes a wide
                                                         32. How does killing Anopheles mosquitoes affect
    diversity of cellular structures. Provide an
                                                             the Plasmodium protists?
    example of two different structures that perform
    the same function for their respective protist.      33. Without treatment, why does African sleeping
                                                             sickness invariably lead to death?
28. The chlorophyte (green algae) genera Ulva and
    Caulerpa both have macroscopic leaf-like and         34. Describe how increasing stress to the ocean
    stem-like structures, but only Ulva species are          would affect a food chain containing
    considered truly multicellular. Explain why.             zooxanthellae, corals, parrotfish, and sharks.

29. Why might a light-sensing eyespot be ineffective
640   23 • Critical Thinking Questions




Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 24
Fungi




FIGURE 24.1 Many species of fungus produce the familiar mushroom (a) which is a reproductive structure. This (b)
coral fungus displays brightly colored fruiting bodies. This electron micrograph shows (c) the spore-bearing
structures of Aspergillus, a type of toxic fungus found mostly in soil and plants. (credit “mushroom”: modification of
work by Chris Wee; credit “coral fungus”: modification of work by Cory Zanker; credit “Aspergillus”: modification of
work by Janice Haney Carr, Robert Simmons, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)


CHAPTER OUTLINE
24.1 Characteristics of Fungi
24.2 Classifications of Fungi
24.3 Ecology of Fungi
24.4 Fungal Parasites and Pathogens
24.5 Importance of Fungi in Human Life


INTRODUCTION The word fungus comes from the Latin word for mushrooms. Indeed, the
familiar mushroom is a reproductive structure used by many types of fungi. However, there are
also many fungus species that don't produce mushrooms at all. Being eukaryotes, a typical fungal
cell contains a true nucleus and many membrane-bound organelles. The kingdom Fungi includes
an enormous variety of living organisms. While scientists have identified about 135,000 species of
fungi, this is only a fraction of the more than 1.5 million species of fungus likely present on Earth.
Edible mushrooms, yeasts, black mold, and the producer of the antibiotic penicillin, Penicillium
notatum, are all members of the kingdom Fungi, which belongs to the domain Eukarya.

24.1 Characteristics of Fungi
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • List the characteristics of fungi
   • Describe the composition of the mycelium
   • Describe the mode of nutrition of fungi
   • Explain sexual and asexual reproduction in fungi

Fungi, once considered plant-like organisms, are more closely related to animals than plants.
642   24 • Fungi



      Fungi are not capable of photosynthesis: they are heterotrophic because they use complex organic
      compounds as sources of energy and carbon. Fungi share a few other traits with animals. Their
      cell walls are composed of chitin, which is found in the exoskeletons of arthropods. Fungi produce
      a number of pigments, including melanin, also found in the hair and skin of animals. Like animals,
      fungi also store carbohydrates as glycogen. However, like bacteria, fungi absorb nutrients across
      the cell surface and act as decomposers, helping to recycle nutrients by breaking down organic
      materials to simple molecules.

      Some fungal organisms multiply only asexually, whereas others undergo both asexual
      reproduction and sexual reproduction with alternation of generations. Most fungi produce a large
      number of spores, which are haploid cells that can undergo mitosis to form multicellular, haploid
      individuals.

      Fungi often interact with other organisms, forming beneficial or mutualistic associations. For
      example, most terrestrial plants form symbiotic relationships with fungi. The roots of the plant
      connect with the underground parts of the fungus, which form mycorrhizae. Through mycorrhizae,
      the fungus and plant exchange nutrients and water, greatly aiding the survival of both species.
      Alternatively, lichens are an association between a fungus and its photosynthetic partner (usually
      an alga).

      Fungi also cause serious infections in plants and animals. For example, Dutch elm disease, which
      is caused by the fungus Ophiostoma ulmi, is a particularly devastating type of fungal infestation
      that destroys many native species of elm (Ulmus sp.) by infecting the tree’s vascular system. The
      elm bark beetle acts as a vector, transmitting the disease from tree to tree. Accidentally
      introduced in the 1900s, the fungus decimated elm trees across the continent. Many European
      and Asiatic elms are less susceptible to Dutch elm disease than American elms.

      In humans, fungal infections are generally considered challenging to treat. Unlike bacteria, fungi
      do not respond to traditional antibiotic therapy, since they are eukaryotes. Fungal infections may
      prove deadly for individuals with compromised immune systems.

      Fungi have many commercial applications. The food industry uses yeasts in baking, brewing, and
      cheese and wine making. Many industrial compounds are byproducts of fungal fermentation.
      Fungi are the source of many commercial enzymes and antibiotics.

      Although humans have used yeasts and mushrooms since prehistoric times, until recently, the
      biology of fungi was poorly understood. In fact, up until the mid-20th century, many scientists
      classified fungi as plants! Fungi, like plants, are mostly sessile and seemingly rooted in place. They
      possess a stem-like structure similar to plants, as well as having a root-like fungal mycelium in the
      soil. In addition, their mode of nutrition was poorly understood. Progress in the field of fungal
      biology was the result of mycology: the scientific study of fungi. Based on fossil evidence, fungi
      have been found in the Devonian era, about 410 million years ago. However, new findings might
      place the appearance of the first fungi during the Neoproterozoic era, about 900 million years ago.
      Molecular biology analysis of the fungal genome demonstrates that fungi are more closely related
      to animals than plants. Under some current systematic phylogenies, they continue to be a
      monophyletic group of organisms.



              CAREER CONNECTION

      Mycologist
      Mycologists are biologists who study fungi. Historically, mycology was a branch of microbiology,
      and many mycologists start their careers with a degree in microbiology. To become a mycologist, a
      bachelor's degree in a biological science (preferably majoring in microbiology) and a master's
      degree in mycology are minimally necessary. Mycologists can specialize in taxonomy and fungal
      genomics, molecular and cellular biology, plant pathology, biotechnology, or biochemistry. Some




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        24.1 • Characteristics of Fungi   643



medical microbiologists concentrate on the study of infectious diseases caused by fungi, called mycoses.
Mycologists collaborate with zoologists and plant pathologists to identify and control difficult fungal infections, such
as the devastating chestnut blight, the mysterious decline in frog populations in many areas of the world, or the
deadly epidemic called white nose syndrome, which is decimating bats in the Eastern United States.

Government agencies hire mycologists as research scientists and technicians to monitor the health of crops,
national parks, and national forests. Mycologists are also employed in the private sector by companies that develop
chemical and biological control products or new agricultural products, and by companies that provide disease
control services. Because of the key role played by fungi in the fermentation of alcohol and the preparation of many
important foods, scientists with a good understanding of fungal physiology routinely work in the food technology
industry. Oenology, the science of wine making, relies not only on the knowledge of grape varietals and soil
composition, but also on a solid understanding of the characteristics of the wild yeasts that thrive in different wine-
making regions. It is possible to purchase yeast strains isolated from specific grape-growing regions. The great
French chemist and microbiologist, Louis Pasteur, made many of his essential discoveries working on the humble
brewer’s yeast, thus discovering the process of fermentation.


Cell Structure and Function
Fungi are eukaryotes, and as such, have a complex cellular organization. As eukaryotes, fungal cells contain a
membrane-bound nucleus. The DNA in the nucleus is represented by multiple linear molecules wrapped around
histone proteins, as is observed in other eukaryotic cells. A few types of fungi have accessory genomic structures
comparable to bacterial plasmids (loops of DNA); however, the horizontal transfer of genetic information that occurs
between one bacterium and another rarely occurs in fungi. Fungal cells also contain mitochondria and a complex
system of internal membranes, including the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus.

Unlike plant cells, fungal cells do not have chloroplasts or chlorophyll. Many fungi display bright colors arising from
other cellular pigments, ranging from red to green to black. The poisonous Amanita muscaria (fly agaric) is
recognizable by its bright red cap with white patches (Figure 24.2). Pigments in fungi are associated with the cell
wall and play a protective role against ultraviolet radiation. Some fungal pigments are toxic to humans.




FIGURE 24.2 Amanita. The poisonous Amanita muscaria is native to temperate and boreal regions of North America. (credit: Christine
Majul)

Like plant cells, fungal cells have a thick cell wall. The rigid layers of fungal cell walls contain complex
polysaccharides called chitin and glucans. Chitin (N-acetyl-D-glucosamine), also found in the exoskeleton of
arthropods such as insects, gives structural strength to the cell walls of fungi. The wall provides structural support
and protects the cell from desiccation and some predators. Fungi have plasma membranes similar to those of other
eukaryotes, except that the structure is stabilized by ergosterol: a steroid molecule that replaces the cholesterol
found in animal cell membranes. Most members of the kingdom Fungi are nonmotile. However, flagella are
produced by the spores and gametes in the primitive Phylum Chytridiomycota.

Growth
The vegetative body of a fungus is a unicellular or multicellular thallus. Unicellular fungi are called yeasts.
Multicellular fungi produce threadlike hyphae (singular hypha). Dimorphic fungi can change from the unicellular to
644   24 • Fungi



      multicellular state depending on environmental conditions. Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker’s yeast) and Candida
      species (the agents of thrush, a common fungal infection) are examples of unicellular fungi (Figure 24.3).




      FIGURE 24.3 Candida albicans. Candida albicans is a yeast cell and the agent of candidiasis and thrush. This organism has a similar
      morphology to coccus bacteria; however, yeast is a eukaryotic organism (note the nucleus). (credit: modification of work by Dr. Godon
      Roberstad, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

      Most fungi are multicellular organisms. They display two distinct morphological stages: the vegetative and
      reproductive. The vegetative stage consists of a tangle of hyphae, whereas the reproductive stage can be more
      conspicuous. The mass of hyphae is a mycelium (Figure 24.4). It can grow on a surface, in soil or decaying material,
      in a liquid, or even on living tissue. Although individual hyphae must be observed under a microscope, the mycelium
      of a fungus can be very large, with some species truly being “the fungus humongous.” The giant Armillaria solidipes
      (honey mushroom) is considered the largest organism on Earth, spreading across more than 2,000 acres of
      underground soil in eastern Oregon; it is estimated to be at least 2,400 years old.




      FIGURE 24.4 A fungal mycelium. The mycelium of the fungus Neotestudina rosati can be pathogenic to humans. The fungus enters through
      a cut or scrape and develops a mycetoma, a chronic subcutaneous infection. (credit: CDC)

      Most fungal hyphae are divided into separate cells by endwalls called septa (singular, septum) (Figure 24.5a, c). In
      most phyla of fungi, tiny holes in the septa allow for the rapid flow of nutrients and small molecules from cell to cell
      along the hypha. They are described as perforated septa. The hyphae in bread molds (which belong to the Phylum
      Zygomycota) are not separated by septa. Instead, they are formed by large cells containing many nuclei
      (multinucleate), an arrangement described as coenocytic hyphae (Figure 24.5b).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           24.1 • Characteristics of Fungi   645




FIGURE 24.5 Fungal hyphae. Fungal hyphae may be (a) septated or (b) coenocytic (coeno- = "common"; -cytic = "cell") with many nuclei
present in a single hypha. A bright field light micrograph of (c) Phialophora richardsiae shows septa that divide the hyphae. (credit c:
modification of work by Dr. Lucille Georg, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

Fungi thrive in environments that are moist and slightly acidic, and can grow in dark places or places exposed to
light. They vary in their oxygen requirement. Most fungi are obligate aerobes, requiring oxygen to survive. Other
species, such as members of the Chytridiomycota that reside in the rumen of cattle, are obligate anaerobes, in that
they only use anaerobic respiration because oxygen will disrupt their metabolism or kill them. Yeasts are
intermediate, being facultative anaerobes. This means that they grow best in the presence of oxygen using aerobic
respiration, but can survive using anaerobic respiration when oxygen is not available. The alcohol produced from
yeast fermentation is used in wine and beer production.

Nutrition
Like animals, fungi are heterotrophs; they use complex organic compounds as a source of carbon, rather than fix
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere as do some bacteria and most plants. In addition, fungi do not fix nitrogen from
the atmosphere. Like animals, they must obtain it from their diet. However, unlike most animals, which ingest food
and then digest it internally in specialized organs, fungi perform these steps in the reverse order; digestion precedes
ingestion. First, exoenzymes are transported out of the hyphae, where they process nutrients in the environment.
Then, the smaller molecules produced by this external digestion are absorbed through the large surface area of the
mycelium. As with animal cells, the polysaccharide of storage is glycogen, a branched polysaccharide, rather than
amylopectin, a less densely branched polysaccharide, and amylose, a linear polysaccharide, as found in plants.

Fungi are mostly saprobes (saprophyte is an equivalent term): organisms that derive nutrients from decaying
organic matter. They obtain their nutrients from dead or decomposing organic material derived mainly from plants.
Fungal exoenzymes are able to break down insoluble compounds, such as the cellulose and lignin of dead wood,
into readily absorbable glucose molecules. The carbon, nitrogen, and other elements are thus released into the
environment. Because of their varied metabolic pathways, fungi fulfill an important ecological role and are being
investigated as potential tools in bioremediation of chemically damaged ecosystems. For example, some species of
fungi can be used to break down diesel oil and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Other species take up
heavy metals, such as cadmium and lead.

Some fungi are parasitic, infecting either plants or animals. Smut and Dutch elm disease affect plants, whereas
athlete’s foot and candidiasis (thrush) are medically important fungal infections in humans. In environments poor in
nitrogen, some fungi resort to predation of nematodes (small non-segmented roundworms). In fact, species of
Arthrobotrys fungi have a number of mechanisms to trap nematodes: One mechanism involves constricting rings
within the network of hyphae. The rings swell when they touch the nematode, gripping it in a tight hold. The fungus
646   24 • Fungi



      then penetrates the tissue of the worm by extending specialized hyphae called haustoria. Many parasitic fungi
      possess haustoria, as these structures penetrate the tissues of the host, release digestive enzymes within the host's
      body, and absorb the digested nutrients.

      Reproduction
      Fungi reproduce sexually and/or asexually. Some fungi reproduce both sexually and asexually, while other fungi
      reproduce only asexually (by mitosis).

      In both sexual and asexual reproduction, fungi produce spores that disperse from the parent organism by either
      floating on the wind or hitching a ride on an animal. Fungal spores are smaller and lighter than plant seeds. For
      example, the giant puffball mushroom bursts open and releases trillions of spores in a massive cloud of what looks
      like finely particulate dust. The huge number of spores released increases the likelihood of landing in an
      environment that will support growth (Figure 24.6).




      FIGURE 24.6 Puffball and spores. The (a) giant puffball mushroom releases (b) a cloud of spores when it reaches maturity. (credit a:
      modification of work by Roger Griffith; credit b: modification of work by Pearson Scott Foresman, donated to the Wikimedia Foundation)

      Asexual Reproduction
      Fungi reproduce asexually by fragmentation, budding, or producing spores. Fragments of hyphae can grow new
      colonies. Somatic cells in yeast form buds. During budding (an expanded type of cytokinesis), a bulge forms on the
      side of the cell, the nucleus divides mitotically, and the bud ultimately detaches itself from the mother cell (Figure
      24.7).




      FIGURE 24.7 Budding in Histoplasma. The dark cells in this bright field light micrograph are the pathogenic yeast Histoplasma capsulatum,
      seen against a backdrop of light blue tissue. Histoplasma primarily infects lungs but can spread to other tissues, causing histoplasmosis, a
      potentially fatal disease. (credit: modification of work by Dr. Libero Ajello, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

      The most common mode of asexual reproduction is through the formation of asexual spores, which are produced by
      a single individual thallus (through mitosis) and are genetically identical to the parent thallus (Figure 24.8). Spores



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      24.1 • Characteristics of Fungi   647



allow fungi to expand their distribution and colonize new environments. They may be released from the parent
thallus either outside or within a special reproductive sac called a sporangium.




             FIGURE 24.8 Generalized fungal life cycle. Fungi may have both asexual and sexual stages of reproduction.

There are many types of asexual spores. Conidiospores are unicellular or multicellular spores that are released
directly from the tip or side of the hypha. Other asexual spores originate in the fragmentation of a hypha to form
single cells that are released as spores; some of these have a thick wall surrounding the fragment. Yet others bud off
the vegetative parent cell. In contrast to conidiospores, sporangiospores are produced directly from a sporangium
(Figure 24.9).
648   24 • Fungi




      FIGURE 24.9 Sporangiospores. This bright field light micrograph shows the release of spores from a sporangium at the end of a hypha
      called a sporangiophore. The organism is a Mucor sp. fungus, a mold often found indoors. (credit: modification of work by Dr. Lucille Georg,
      CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

      Sexual Reproduction
      Sexual reproduction introduces genetic variation into a population of fungi. In fungi, sexual reproduction often
      occurs in response to adverse environmental conditions. During sexual reproduction, two mating types are
      produced. When both mating types are present in the same mycelium, it is called homothallic, or self-fertile.
      Heterothallic mycelia require two different, but compatible, mycelia to reproduce sexually.

      Although there are many variations in fungal sexual reproduction, all include the following three stages (Figure
      24.8). First, during plasmogamy (literally, “marriage or union of cytoplasm”), two haploid cells fuse, leading to a
      dikaryotic stage where two haploid nuclei coexist in a single cell. During karyogamy (“nuclear marriage”), the
      haploid nuclei fuse to form a diploid zygote nucleus. Finally, meiosis takes place in the gametangia (singular,
      gametangium) organs, in which gametes of different mating types are generated. At this stage, spores are
      disseminated into the environment.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      Review the characteristics of fungi by watching this video (https://openstax.org/l/fungi_kingdom).


      24.2 Classifications of Fungi
      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
         • Identify fungi and place them into the five major phyla according to current classification
         • Describe each phylum in terms of major representative species and patterns of reproduction

      The kingdom Fungi contains five major phyla that were established according to their mode of sexual reproduction
      or using molecular data. Unrelated fungi that reproduce without a sexual cycle, were once placed for convenience in
      a sixth group, the Deuteromycota, called a “form phylum,” because superficially they appeared to be similar, a
      polyphyletic group (group of organisms that is of mixed evolutionary origin). However, most mycologists have
      discontinued this practice. Rapid advances in molecular biology and the sequencing of 18S rRNA (ribosomal RNA)
      continue to show new and different relationships among the various categories of fungi.

      The five true phyla of fungi are the Chytridiomycota (Chytrids), the Zygomycota (conjugated fungi), the Ascomycota
      (sac fungi), the Basidiomycota (club fungi) and the recently described Phylum Glomeromycota (Figure 24.10).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         24.2 • Classifications of Fungi   649




FIGURE 24.10 Fungal phyla. Note: “-mycota” is used to designate a phylum while “-mycetes” formally denotes a class or is used informally
to refer to all members of the phylum.

Chytridiomycota: The Chytrids
The only class in the Phylum Chytridiomycota is the Chytridiomycetes. The chytrids are the simplest and most
primitive Eumycota, or true fungi. The evolutionary record shows that the first recognizable chytrids appeared
during the late pre-Cambrian period, more than 500 million years ago. Like all fungi, chytrids have chitin in their cell
walls, but one group of chytrids has both cellulose and chitin in the cell wall. Most chytrids are unicellular; however,
a few form multicellular organisms and hyphae, which have no septa between cells (coenocytic). The Chytrids are
the only fungi that have retained flagella. They produce both gametes and diploid zoospores that swim with the help
of a single flagellum. An unusual feature of the chytrids is that both male and female gametes are flagellated.

The ecological habitat and cell structure of chytrids have much in common with protists. Chytrids usually live in
aquatic environments, although some species live on land. Some species thrive as parasites on plants, insects, or
amphibians (Figure 24.11), while others are saprobes. The chytrid species Allomyces is well characterized as an
experimental organism. Its reproductive cycle includes both asexual and sexual phases. Allomyces produces diploid
or haploid flagellated zoospores in a sporangium.
650   24 • Fungi




      FIGURE 24.11 Chytrids. The chytrid Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis is seen in these light micrographs as transparent spheres growing on
      (a) a freshwater arthropod (water mite) and (b) algae. This chytrid causes skin diseases in many species of amphibians, resulting in species
      decline and extinction. (credit: modification of work by Johnson ML, Speare R., CDC)

      Zygomycota: The Conjugated Fungi
      The zygomycetes are a relatively small group of fungi belonging to the Phylum Zygomycota. They include the
      familiar bread mold, Rhizopus stolonifer, which rapidly propagates on the surfaces of breads, fruits, and vegetables.
      Most species are saprobes, living off decaying organic material; a few are parasites, particularly of insects.
      Zygomycetes play a considerable commercial role. For example, the metabolic products of some species of
      Rhizopus are intermediates in the synthesis of semi-synthetic steroid hormones.

      Zygomycetes have a thallus of coenocytic hyphae in which the nuclei are haploid when the organism is in the
      vegetative stage. The fungi usually reproduce asexually by producing sporangiospores (Figure 24.12). The black tips
      of bread mold are the swollen sporangia packed with black spores (Figure 24.13). When spores land on a suitable
      substrate, they germinate and produce a new mycelium. Sexual reproduction starts when environmental conditions
      become unfavorable. Two opposing mating strains (type + and type –) must be in close proximity for gametangia
      from the hyphae to be produced and fuse, leading to karyogamy. Each zygospore can contain several diploid nuclei.
      The developing diploid zygospores have thick coats that protect them from desiccation and other hazards. They
      may remain dormant until environmental conditions are favorable. When the zygospore germinates, it undergoes
      meiosis and produces haploid spores, which will, in turn, grow into a new organism. This form of sexual reproduction
      in fungi is called conjugation (although it differs markedly from conjugation in bacteria and protists), giving rise to
      the name “conjugated fungi”.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         24.2 • Classifications of Fungi   651




FIGURE 24.12 Zygomycete life cycle. Zygomycetes have asexual and sexual phases in their life cycles. In the asexual phase, spores are
produced from haploid sporangia by mitosis (not shown). In the sexual phase, plus and minus haploid mating types conjugate to form a
heterokaryotic zygosporangium. Karyogamy then produces a diploid zygote. Diploid cells in the zygote undergo meiosis and germinate to
form a haploid sporangium, which releases the next generation of haploid spores.




FIGURE 24.13 Rhizopus spores. Asexual sporangia grow at the end of stalks, which appear as (a) white fuzz seen on this bread mold,
Rhizopus stolonifer. The black tips (b) of bread mold are the spore-containing sporangia. (credit b: modification of work by
"polandeze"/Flickr)

Ascomycota: The Sac Fungi
The majority of known fungi belong to the Phylum Ascomycota, which is characterized by the formation of an ascus
(plural, asci), a sac-like structure that contains haploid ascospores. Filamentous ascomycetes produce hyphae
divided by perforated septa, allowing streaming of cytoplasm from one cell to another. Conidia and asci, which are
652   24 • Fungi



      used respectively for asexual and sexual reproduction, are usually separated from the vegetative hyphae by blocked
      (non-perforated) septa. Many ascomycetes are of commercial importance. Some play a beneficial role for humanity,
      such as the yeasts used in baking, brewing, and wine fermentation, and directly as food delicacies such as truffles
      and morels. Aspergillus oryzae is used in the fermentation of rice to produce sake. Other ascomycetes parasitize
      plants and animals, including humans. For example, fungal pneumonia poses a significant threat to AIDS patients
      who have a compromised immune system. Ascomycetes not only infest and destroy crops directly; they also
      produce poisonous secondary metabolites that make crops unfit for consumption.

      Asexual reproduction is frequent and involves the production of conidiophores that release haploid conidiospores
      (Figure 24.14). Sexual reproduction starts with the development of special hyphae from either one of two types of
      mating strains (Figure 24.14). The “male” strain produces an antheridium and the “female” strain develops an
      ascogonium. At fertilization, the antheridium and the ascogonium combine in plasmogamy, without nuclear fusion.
      Special dikaryotic ascogenous (ascus-producing) hyphae arise from this dikaryon, in which each cell has pairs of
      nuclei: one from the “male” strain and one from the “female” strain. In each ascus, two haploid nuclei fuse in
      karyogamy. Thousands of asci fill a fruiting body called the ascocarp. The diploid nucleus in each ascus gives rise to
      haploid nuclei by meiosis, and spore walls form around each nucleus. The spores in each ascus contain the meiotic
      products of a single diploid nucleus. The ascospores are then released, germinate, and form hyphae that are
      disseminated in the environment and start new mycelia (Figure 24.15).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           24.2 • Classifications of Fungi   653




        VISUAL CONNECTION




FIGURE 24.14 Ascomycete life cycle. The lifecycle of an ascomycete is characterized by the production of asci during the sexual phase. In
each ascus, the four nuclei produced by meiosis divide once mitotically for a total of eight haploid ascospores. The haploid phase is the
predominant phase of the life cycle in Ascomycetes.

Which of the following statements is true?

  a. A dikaryotic ascus that forms in the ascocarp undergoes karyogamy, meiosis, and mitosis to form eight
     ascospores.
  b. A diploid ascus that forms in the ascocarp undergoes karyogamy, meiosis, and mitosis to form eight
     ascospores.
  c. A haploid zygote that forms in the ascocarp undergoes karyogamy, meiosis, and mitosis to form eight
654   24 • Fungi



           ascospores.
        d. A dikaryotic ascus that forms in the ascocarp undergoes plasmogamy, meiosis, and mitosis to form eight
           ascospores.




      FIGURE 24.15 Ascospores. The bright field light micrograph shows ascospores being released from asci in the fungus Talaromyces flavus
      var. flavus. (credit: modification of work by Dr. Lucille Georg, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

      Basidiomycota: The Club Fungi
      The fungi in the Phylum Basidiomycota are easily recognizable under a light microscope by their club-shaped
      fruiting bodies called basidia (singular, basidium), which are the swollen terminal cells of hyphae. The basidia,
      which are the reproductive organs of these fungi, are often contained within the familiar mushroom, commonly seen
      in fields after rain, on the supermarket shelves, and growing on your lawn (Figure 24.16). These mushroom-
      producing basidiomycetes are sometimes referred to as “gill fungi” because of the presence of gill-like structures on
      the underside of the cap. The gills are actually compacted hyphae on which the basidia are borne. This group also
      includes shelf fungi, which cling to the bark of trees like small shelves. In addition, the basidiomycota include smuts
      and rusts, which are important plant pathogens. Most edible fungi belong to the Phylum Basidiomycota; however,
      some basidiomycota are inedible and produce deadly toxins. For example, Cryptococcus neoformans causes severe
      respiratory illness. The infamous death cap mushroom (Amanita phalloides) is related to the fly agaric seen at the
      beginning of the previous section.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            24.2 • Classifications of Fungi   655




FIGURE 24.16 Fairy ring. The fruiting bodies of a basidiomycete form a ring in a meadow, commonly called “fairy ring.” The best-known
fairy ring fungus has the scientific name Marasmius oreades. The body of this fungus, its mycelium, is underground and grows outward in a
circle. As it grows, the mycelium depletes the soil of nitrogen, causing the mycelia to grow away from the center and leading to the “fairy
ring” of fruiting bodies where there is adequate soil nitrogen. (Credit: "Cropcircles"/Wikipedia Commons)]

The lifecycle of basidiomycetes includes sexual and asexual reproduction (Figure 24.17). Most fungi are haploid
through most of their life cycles, but the basidiomycetes produce both haploid and dikaryotic mycelia, with the
dikaryotic phase being dominant. (Note: The dikaryotic phase is technically not diploid, since the nuclei remain
unfused until shortly before spore production.) In the basidiomycetes, sexual spores are more common than
asexual spores. The sexual spores form in the club-shaped basidium and are called basidiospores. In the basidium,
nuclei of two different mating strains fuse (karyogamy), giving rise to a diploid zygote that then undergoes meiosis.
The haploid nuclei migrate into four different chambers appended to the basidium, and then become basidiospores.

Each basidiospore germinates and generates monokaryotic haploid hyphae. The mycelium that results is called a
primary mycelium. Mycelia of different mating strains can combine and produce a secondary mycelium that contains
haploid nuclei of two different mating strains. This is the dominant dikaryotic stage of the basidiomycete life cycle.
Thus, each cell in this mycelium has two haploid nuclei, which will not fuse until formation of the basidium.
Eventually, the secondary mycelium generates a basidiocarp, a fruiting body that protrudes from the ground—this is
what we think of as a mushroom. The basidiocarp bears the developing basidia on the gills under its cap.
656   24 • Fungi




              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 24.17 Basidiomycete life cycle. The lifecycle of a basidiomycete has sexual and asexual reproduction with haploid and dikaryotic
      mycelia. Haploid primary mycelia fuse to form a dikaryotic secondary mycelium, which is the dominant stage of the life cycle, and produces
      the basidiocarp.

      Which of the following statements is true?

        a.   A basidium is the fruiting body of a mushroom-producing fungus, and it forms four basidiocarps.
        b.   The result of the plasmogamy step is four basidiospores.
        c.   Karyogamy results directly in the formation of mycelia.
        d.   A basidiocarp is the fruiting body of a mushroom-producing fungus.


      Asexual Ascomycota and Basidiomycota
      Imperfect fungi—those that do not display a sexual phase—were formerly classified in the form phylum
      Deuteromycota, an invalid taxon no longer used in the present, ever-developing classification of organisms. While
      Deuteromycota was once a classification taxon, recent molecular analysis has shown that some of the members
      classified in this group belong to the Ascomycota (Figure 24.18) or the Basidiomycota. Because some members of
      this group have not yet been appropriately classified, they are less well described in comparison to members of



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   24.3 • Ecology of Fungi     657



other fungal taxa. Most imperfect fungi live on land, with a few aquatic exceptions. They form visible mycelia with a
fuzzy appearance and are commonly known as mold.




FIGURE 24.18 Aspergillus. Aspergillus niger is an asexually reproducing fungus (phylum Ascomycota) commonly found as a food
contaminant. The spherical structure in this light micrograph is an asexual conidiophore. Molecular studies have placed Aspergillus with the
ascomycetes and sexual cycles have been identified in some species. (credit: modification of work by Dr. Lucille Georg, CDC; scale-bar data
from Matt Russell)

The fungi in this group have a large impact on everyday human life. The food industry relies on them for ripening
some cheeses. The blue veins in Roquefort cheese and the white crust on Camembert are the result of fungal
growth. The antibiotic penicillin was originally discovered on an overgrown Petri plate, on which a colony of
Penicillium fungi had killed the bacterial growth surrounding it. Other fungi in this group cause serious diseases,
either directly as parasites (which infect both plants and humans), or as producers of potent toxic compounds, as
seen in the aflatoxins released by fungi of the genus Aspergillus.

Glomeromycota
The Glomeromycota is a newly established phylum that comprises about 230 species, all of which are involved in
close associations with the roots of trees. Fossil records indicate that trees and their root symbionts share a long
evolutionary history. It appears that nearly all members of this family form arbuscular mycorrhizae: the hyphae
interact with the root cells forming a mutually beneficial association in which the plants supply the carbon source
and energy in the form of carbohydrates to the fungus, and the fungus supplies essential minerals from the soil to
the plant. The exception is Geosiphon pyriformis, which hosts the cyanobacterium Nostoc as an endosymbiont.

The glomeromycetes do not reproduce sexually and do not survive without the presence of plant roots. Although
they have coenocytic hyphae like the zygomycetes, they do not form zygospores. DNA analysis shows that all
glomeromycetes probably descended from a common ancestor, making them a monophyletic lineage.

24.3 Ecology of Fungi
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Describe the role of fungi in various ecosystems
   • Describe mutualistic relationships of fungi with plant roots and photosynthetic organisms
   • Describe the beneficial relationship between some fungi and insects

Fungi play a crucial role in the constantly changing “balance” of ecosystems. They colonize most habitats on Earth,
preferring dark, moist conditions. They can thrive in seemingly hostile environments, such as the tundra, thanks to a
most successful symbiosis with photosynthetic organisms like algae to produce lichens. Within their communities,
fungi are not as obvious as are large animals or tall trees. Like bacteria, they act behind the scenes as major
decomposers. With their versatile metabolism, fungi break down organic matter, which would otherwise not be
recycled.

Habitats
Although fungi are primarily associated with humid and cool environments that provide a supply of organic matter,
658   24 • Fungi



      they colonize a surprising diversity of habitats, from seawater to human skin and mucous membranes. Chytrids are
      found primarily in aquatic environments. Other fungi, such as Coccidioides immitis, which causes pneumonia when
      its spores are inhaled, thrive in the dry and sandy soil of the southwestern United States. Fungi that parasitize coral
      reefs live in the ocean. However, most members of the Kingdom Fungi grow on the forest floor, where the dark and
      damp environment is rich in decaying debris from plants and animals. In these environments, fungi play a major role
      as decomposers and recyclers, making it possible for members of the other kingdoms to be supplied with nutrients
      and live.

      Decomposers and Recyclers
      The food web would be incomplete without organisms that decompose organic matter (Figure 24.19). Some
      elements—such as nitrogen and phosphorus—are required in large quantities by biological systems, and yet are not
      abundant in the environment. The action of fungi releases these elements from decaying matter, making them
      available to other living organisms. Trace elements present in low amounts in many habitats are essential for
      growth, and would remain tied up in rotting organic matter if fungi and bacteria did not return them to the
      environment via their metabolic activity.




      FIGURE 24.19 Bracket fungi. Fungi are an important part of ecosystem nutrient cycles. These bracket fungi growing on the side of a tree are
      the fruiting structures of a basidiomycete. They receive their nutrients through their hyphae, which invade and decay the tree trunk. (credit:
      Cory Zanker)

      The ability of fungi to degrade many large and insoluble molecules is due to their mode of nutrition. As seen earlier,
      digestion precedes ingestion. Fungi produce a variety of exoenzymes to digest nutrients. The enzymes are either
      released into the substrate or remain bound to the outside of the fungal cell wall. Large molecules are broken down
      into small molecules, which are transported into the cell by a system of protein carriers embedded in the cell
      membrane. Because the movement of small molecules and enzymes is dependent on the presence of water, active
      growth depends on a relatively high percentage of moisture in the environment.

      As saprobes, fungi help maintain a sustainable ecosystem for the animals and plants that share the same habitat. In
      addition to replenishing the environment with nutrients, fungi interact directly with other organisms in beneficial,
      and sometimes damaging, ways (Figure 24.20).




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                     24.3 • Ecology of Fungi   659




FIGURE 24.20 Shelf fungi. Shelf fungi, so called because they grow on trees in a stack, attack and digest the trunk or branches of a tree.
While some shelf fungi are found only on dead trees, others can parasitize living trees and cause eventual death, so they are considered
serious tree pathogens. (credit: Cory Zanker)

Mutualistic Relationships
Symbiosis is the ecological interaction between two organisms that live together. This definition does not describe
the type or quality of the interaction. When both members of the association benefit, the symbiotic relationship is
called mutualistic. Fungi form mutualistic associations with many types of organisms, including cyanobacteria,
algae, plants, and animals.

Fungus/Plant Mutualism
One of the most remarkable associations between fungi and plants is the establishment of mycorrhizae.
Mycorrhiza, which is derived from the Greek words myco meaning fungus and rhizo meaning root, refers to the
fungal partner of a mutualistic association between vascular plant roots and their symbiotic fungi. Nearly 90 percent
of all vascular plant species have mycorrhizal partners. In a mycorrhizal association, the fungal mycelia use their
extensive network of hyphae and large surface area in contact with the soil to channel water and minerals from the
soil into the plant. In exchange, the plant supplies the products of photosynthesis to fuel the metabolism of the
fungus.

There are several basic types of mycorrhizae. Ectomycorrhizae (“outside” mycorrhizae) depend on fungi enveloping
the roots in a sheath (called a mantle). Hyphae grow from the mantle into the root and envelope the outer layers of
the root cells in a network of hyphae called a Hartig net (Figure 24.21). The fungal partner can belong to the
Ascomycota, Basidiomycota or Zygomycota. Endomycorrhizae ("inside" mycorrhizae), also called arbuscular
mycorrhizae, are produced when the fungi grow inside the root in a branched structure called an arbuscule (from the
Latin for “little trees”). The fungal partners of endomycorrhizal associates all belong to the Glomeromycota. The
fungal arbuscules penetrate root cells between the cell wall and the plasma membrane and are the site of the
metabolic exchanges between the fungus and the host plant (Figure 24.21b and Figure 24.22b). Orchids rely on a
third type of mycorrhiza. Orchids are epiphytes that typically produce very small airborne seeds without much
storage to sustain germination and growth. Their seeds will not germinate without a mycorrhizal partner (usually a
Basidiomycete). After nutrients in the seed are depleted, fungal symbionts support the growth of the orchid by
providing necessary carbohydrates and minerals. Some orchids continue to be mycorrhizal throughout their life
cycle.
660   24 • Fungi




              VISUAL CONNECTION




      FIGURE 24.21 Two types of mycorrhizae. (a) Ectomycorrhizae and (b) arbuscular or endomycorrhizae have different mechanisms for
      interacting with the roots of plants. (credit b: MS Turmel, University of Manitoba, Plant Science Department)

      If symbiotic fungi were absent from the soil, what impact do you think this would have on plant growth?




      FIGURE 24.22 Mycorrhizae. The (a) infection of Pinus radiata (Monterey pine) roots by the hyphae of Amanita muscaria (fly amanita) causes
      the pine tree to produce many small, branched rootlets. The Amanita hyphae cover these small roots with a white mantle. (b) Spores (the
      round bodies) and hyphae (thread-like structures) are evident in this light micrograph of an arbuscular mycorrhiza by a fungus on the root of
      a corn plant. (credit a: modification of work by Randy Molina, USDA; credit b: modification of work by Sara Wright, USDA-ARS; scale-bar
      data from Matt Russell)

      Other examples of fungus–plant mutualism include the endophytes: fungi that live inside tissue without damaging
      the host plant. Endophytes release toxins that repel herbivores, or confer resistance to environmental stress factors,
      such as infection by microorganisms, drought, or heavy metals in soil.



              EVOLUTION CONNECTION

      Coevolution of Land Plants and Mycorrhizae
      As we have seen, mycorrhizae are the fungal partners of a mutually beneficial symbiotic association that coevolved
      between roots of vascular plants and fungi. A well-supported theory proposes that fungi were instrumental in the
      evolution of the root system in plants and contributed to the success of Angiosperms. The bryophytes (mosses and
      liverworts), which are considered the most ancestral plants and the first to survive and adapt on land, have simple
      underground rhizoids, rather than a true root system, and therefore cannot survive in dry areas. However, some
      bryophytes have arbuscular mycorrhizae and some do not.




      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      24.3 • Ecology of Fungi    661



True roots first appeared in the ancestral vascular plants: Vascular plants that developed a system of thin extensions
from their roots would have had a selective advantage over nonvascular plants because they had a greater surface
area of contact with the fungal partners than did the rhizoids of mosses and liverworts. The first true roots would
have allowed vascular plants to obtain more water and nutrients in the ground.

Fossil records indicate that fungi actually preceded the invasion of ancestral freshwater plants onto dry land. The
first association between fungi and photosynthetic organisms on land involved moss-like plants and endophytes.
These early associations developed before roots appeared in plants. Slowly, the benefits of the endophyte and
rhizoid interactions for both partners led to present-day mycorrhizae: About 90 percent of today’s vascular plants
have associations with fungi in their rhizosphere.

The fungi involved in mycorrhizae display many characteristics of ancestral fungi; they produce simple spores, show
little diversification, do not have a sexual reproductive cycle, and cannot live outside of a mycorrhizal association.
The plants benefited from the association because mycorrhizae allowed them to move into new habitats and
allowed the increased uptake of nutrients, which gave them an enormous selective advantage over plants that did
not establish symbiotic relationships.


Lichens
Lichens display a range of colors and textures (Figure 24.23) and can survive in the most unusual and hostile
habitats. They cover rocks, gravestones, tree bark, and the ground in the tundra where plant roots cannot penetrate.
Lichens can survive extended periods of drought, when they become completely desiccated, and then rapidly
become active once water is available again.

     LINK TO LEARNING
Explore the world of lichens using this site (https://openstax.org/l/lichenland) from Oregon State University.




FIGURE 24.23 Lichens. Lichens have many forms. They may be (a) crust-like, (b) hair-like, or (c) leaf-like. (credit a: modification of work by
Jo Naylor; credit b: modification of work by "djpmapleferryman"/Flickr; credit c: modification of work by Cory Zanker)

It is important to note that lichens are not a single organism, but rather another wonderful example of a mutualism,
in which a fungus (usually a member of the Ascomycota or Basidiomycota) lives in a physical and physiological
relationship with a photosynthetic organism (a eukaryotic alga or a prokaryotic cyanobacterium) (Figure 24.24).
Generally, neither the fungus nor the photosynthetic organism can survive alone outside of the symbiotic
relationship. The body of a lichen, referred to as a thallus, is formed of hyphae wrapped around the photosynthetic
partner. The photosynthetic organism provides carbon and energy in the form of carbohydrates. Some cyanobacteria
additionally fix nitrogen from the atmosphere, contributing nitrogenous compounds to the association. In return, the
fungus supplies minerals and protection from dryness and excessive light by encasing the algae in its mycelium. The
fungus also attaches the lichen to its substrate.
662   24 • Fungi




      FIGURE 24.24 Structure of a lichen. This cross-section of a lichen thallus shows the (a) upper cortex of fungal hyphae, which provides
      protection; the (b) algal zone where photosynthesis occurs, the (c) medulla of fungal hyphae, and the (d) lower cortex, which also provides
      protection and may have (e) rhizines to anchor the thallus to the substrate.

      The thallus of lichens grows very slowly, expanding its diameter a few millimeters per year. Both the fungus and the
      alga participate in the formation of dispersal units, called soredia—clusters of algal cells surrounded by mycelia.
      Soredia are dispersed by wind and water and form new lichens.

      Lichens are extremely sensitive to air pollution, especially to abnormal levels of nitrogenous and sulfurous
      compounds. The U.S. Forest Service and National Park Service can monitor air quality by measuring the relative
      abundance and health of the lichen population in an area. Lichens fulfill many ecological roles. Caribou and reindeer
      eat lichens, and they provide cover for small invertebrates that hide in the mycelium. In the production of textiles,
      weavers used lichens to dye wool for many centuries until the advent of synthetic dyes. The pigments used in litmus
      paper are also extracted from lichens.

           LINK TO LEARNING
      Lichens are used to monitor the quality of air. Read more on this site (https://openstax.org/l/lichen_monitrng) from
      the United States Forest Service.


      Fungus/Animal Mutualism
      Fungi have evolved mutualisms with numerous insects in Phylum Arthropoda: joint-legged invertebrates with a
      chitinous exoskeleton. Arthropods depend on the fungus for protection from predators and pathogens, while the
      fungus obtains nutrients and a way to disseminate spores into new environments. The association between species
      of Basidiomycota and scale insects is one example. The fungal mycelium covers and protects the insect colonies.
      The scale insects foster a flow of nutrients from the parasitized plant to the fungus.

      In a second example, leaf-cutter ants of Central and South America literally farm fungi. They cut disks of leaves from
      plants and pile them up in subterranean gardens (Figure 24.25). Fungi are cultivated in these disk gardens, digesting
      the cellulose in the leaves that the ants cannot break down. Once smaller sugar molecules are produced and
      consumed by the fungi, the fungi in turn become a meal for the ants. The insects also patrol their garden, preying on
      competing fungi. Both ants and fungi benefit from this mutualistic association. The fungus receives a steady supply
      of leaves and freedom from competition, while the ants feed on the fungi they cultivate.



      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 24.4 • Fungal Parasites and Pathogens   663




     FIGURE 24.25 Leaf-cutter ant. A leaf-cutter ant transports a leaf that will feed a farmed fungus. (credit: Scott Bauer, USDA-ARS)

Fungivores
Animal dispersal is important for some fungi because an animal may carry fungal spores considerable distances
from the source. Fungal spores are rarely completely degraded in the gastrointestinal tract of an animal, and many
are able to germinate when they are passed in the feces. Some “dung fungi” actually require passage through the
digestive system of herbivores to complete their lifecycle. The black truffle—a prized gourmet delicacy—is the
fruiting body of an underground ascomycete. Almost all truffles are ectomycorrhizal, and are usually found in close
association with trees. Animals eat truffles and disperse the spores. In Italy and France, truffle hunters use female
pigs to sniff out truffles (female pigs are attracted to truffles because the fungus releases a volatile compound
closely related to a pheromone produced by male pigs.)

24.4 Fungal Parasites and Pathogens
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
   • Describe some fungal parasites and pathogens of plants
   • Describe the different types of fungal infections in humans
   • Explain why antifungal therapy is hampered by the similarity between fungal and animal cells

Parasitism describes a symbiotic relationship in which one member of the association benefits at the expense of
the other. Both parasites and pathogens harm the host; however, pathogens cause disease, damage to host tissues
or physiology, whereas parasites usually do not, but can cause serious damage and death by competition for
nutrients or other resources. Commensalism occurs when one member benefits without affecting the other.

Plant Parasites and Pathogens
The production of sufficient high-quality crops is essential to human existence. Unfortunately, plant diseases have
ruined many crops throughout human agricultural history, sometimes creating widespread famine. Many plant
pathogens are fungi that cause tissue decay and the eventual death of the host (Figure 24.26). In addition to
destroying plant tissue directly, some plant pathogens spoil crops by producing potent toxins that can further
damage and kill the host plant. Fungi are also responsible for food spoilage and the rotting of stored crops. For
example, the fungus Claviceps purpurea causes ergot, a disease of cereal crops (especially of rye). Although the
fungus reduces the yield of cereals, the effects of the ergot's alkaloid toxins on humans and animals are of much
greater significance. In animals, the disease is referred to as ergotism. The most common signs and symptoms are
convulsions, hallucination, gangrene, and loss of milk in cattle. The active ingredient of ergot is lysergic acid, which
is a precursor of the drug LSD. Smuts, rusts, and powdery or downy mildew are other examples of common fungal
pathogens that affect crops.
664   24 • Fungi




      FIGURE 24.26 Fungal pathogens. Some fungal pathogens include (a) green mold on grapefruit, (b) powdery mildew on a zinnia, (c) stem
      rust on a sheaf of barley, and (d) grey rot on grapes. In wet conditions Botrytis cinerea, the fungus that causes grey rot, can destroy a grape
      crop. However, controlled infection of grapes by Botrytis results in noble rot, a condition that produces strong and much-prized dessert
      wines. (credit a: modification of work by Scott Bauer, USDA-ARS; credit b: modification of work by Stephen Ausmus, USDA-ARS; credit c:
      modification of work by David Marshall, USDA-ARS; credit d: modification of work by Joseph Smilanick, USDA-ARS)

      Aflatoxins are toxic, carcinogenic compounds released by fungi of the genus Aspergillus. Periodically, harvests of
      nuts and grains are tainted by aflatoxins, leading to massive recall of produce. This sometimes ruins producers and
      causes food shortages in developing countries.

      Animal and Human Parasites and Pathogens
      Fungi can affect animals, including humans, in several ways. A mycosis is a fungal disease that results from
      infection and direct damage due to the growth and infiltration of the fungus. Fungi attack animals directly by
      colonizing and destroying tissues. Mycotoxicosis is the poisoning of humans (and other animals) by foods
      contaminated by fungal toxins (mycotoxins). Mycetismus specifically describes the ingestion of preformed toxins in
      poisonous mushrooms. In addition, individuals who display hypersensitivity to molds and spores may develop
      strong and dangerous allergic reactions. Fungal infections are generally very difficult to treat because, unlike
      bacteria, fungi are eukaryotes. Antibiotics only target prokaryotic cells, whereas compounds that kill fungi also harm
      the eukaryotic animal host.

      Many fungal infections are superficial; that is, they occur on the animal’s skin. Termed cutaneous (“skin”) mycoses,
      they can have devastating effects. For example, the decline of the world’s frog population in recent years is caused
      (in part) by the chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. This deadly fungus infects the skin of frogs and
      presumably interferes with cutaneous gaseous exchange, which is essential for amphibian survival. Similarly, more
      than a million bats in the United States have been killed by white-nose syndrome, which appears as a white ring
      around the mouth of the bat. It is caused by the cold-loving fungus Pseudogymnoascus destructans, which
      disseminates its deadly spores in caves where bats hibernate. Mycologists are researching the transmission,
      mechanism, and control of P. destructans to stop its spread.

      Fungi that cause the superficial mycoses of the epidermis, hair, and nails rarely spread to the underlying tissue
      (Figure 24.27). These fungi are often misnamed “dermatophytes”, from the Greek words dermis meaning skin and
      phyte meaning plant, although they are not plants. Dermatophytes are also called “ringworms” because of the red


      Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  24.4 • Fungal Parasites and Pathogens     665



ring they cause on skin. They secrete extracellular enzymes that break down keratin (a protein found in hair, skin,
and nails), causing conditions such as athlete’s foot and jock itch. These conditions are usually treated with over-
the-counter topical creams and powders, and are easily cleared. More persistent superficial mycoses may require
prescription oral medications.




FIGURE 24.27 Fungal diseases of humans. (a) Ringworm presents as a red ring on skin; (b) Trichophyton violaceum, shown in this bright
field light micrograph, causes superficial mycoses on the scalp; (c) Histoplasma capsulatum is an ascomycete that infects airways and
causes symptoms similar to influenza. (credit a: modification of work by Dr. Lucille K. Georg, CDC; credit b: modification of work by Dr.
Lucille K. Georg, CDC; credit c: modification of work by M. Renz, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)

Systemic mycoses spread to internal organs, most commonly entering the body through the respiratory system. For
example, coccidioidomycosis (often called valley fever) is commonly found in the southwestern United States, but
as far north as Washington, where the fungus resides in the dust. Once inhaled, the spores develop in the lungs and
cause symptoms similar to those of tuberculosis. Histoplasmosis is caused by the dimorphic fungus Histoplasma
capsulatum. In its human host, Histoplasma grows as a yeast, causing pulmonary infections, and in rarer cases,
swelling of the membranes of the brain and spinal cord. Treatment of these and many other fungal diseases requires
the use of antifungal medications that have serious side effects.

Opportunistic mycoses are fungal infections that are either common in all environments, or part of the normal biota.
They mainly affect individuals who have a compromised immune system. Patients in the late stages of AIDS suffer
from opportunistic mycoses that can be life threatening. The yeast Candida sp., a common member of the natural
biota, can grow unchecked and infect the vagina or mouth (oral thrush) if the pH of the surrounding environment,
the person’s immune defenses, or the normal population of bacteria are altered.

Mycetismus can occur when poisonous mushrooms are eaten. It causes a number of human fatalities during
mushroom-picking season. Many edible fruiting bodies of fungi resemble highly poisonous relatives, and amateur
mushroom hunters are cautioned to carefully inspect their harvest and avoid eating mushrooms of doubtful origin.
The adage “there are bold mushroom pickers and old mushroom pickers, but are there no old, bold mushroom
pickers” is unfortunately true.



        SCIENTIFIC METHOD CONNECTION

Dutch Elm Disease
Question: Do trees resistant to Dutch elm disease secrete antifungal compounds?

Hypothesis: Construct a hypothesis that addresses this question.

Background: Dutch elm disease is a fungal infestation that affects many species of elm (Ulmus) in North America.
The fungus infects the vascular system of the tree, which blocks water flow within the plant and mimics drought
stress. Accidently introduced to the United States in the early 1930s, it decimated American elm shade trees across
the continent. It is caused by the fungus Ophiostoma ulmi. The elm bark beetle acts as a vector and transmits the
disease from tree to tree. Many European and Asiatic elms are less susceptible to the disease than are American
elms.

Test the hypothesis: A researcher testing this hypothesis might do the following. Inoculate several Petri plates
666   24 • Fungi



      containing a medium that supports the growth of fungi with fragments of Ophiostoma mycelium. Cut (with a metal
      punch) several disks from the vascular tissue of susceptible varieties of American elms and resistant European and
      Asiatic elms. Include control Petri plates inoculated with mycelia without plant tissue to verify that the medium and
      incubation conditions do not interfere with fungal growth. As a positive control, add paper disks impregnated with a
      known fungicide to Petri plates inoculated with the mycelium.

